With Black Friday 2019 set to fall on 29 November, a number of top South African retailers have begun sharing their plans for the big shopping day. Dion Wired said that it will have a number of deals on the latest technology and homeware with 21 stores opening for trade at midnight. It said that it will also have unique and special offers available through its online store. “We’ve secured deals on the best technology and appliances at the best prices. We’re known in the market for our prices on TVs and gaming – this year will be no different,” said Katherine Madley, brand and customer director at DionWired. She added that DionWired’s Black Friday leaflet will be released on 24 November. “We encourage shoppers to get to their nearest DionWired store early on Black Friday. “At DionWired we value the safety and security of our customers and staff. As such we have employed additional security and staff for Black Friday. “We also have exclusive online deals for customers, as well as specials on Cyber Monday – on 2 December.” Massmart Dion Wired is not the only Massmart store preparing for Black Friday as the shopping day has become incredibly important for the whole group. Game and Builders reported a 24% and 33% sales increase over the period in 2018. Makro alone, made its first R200 million within 15 hours on day one which is equivalent to what some of our online competitors made for the entire Black Friday trading period, a Massmart spokesperson told BusinessTech. “In total, in 2018 we reported group sales of R1.8 Billion over the three day (Friday-Sunday) Black Friday period,” Massmart said. Massmart said that every year it conducts a  post-Black Friday review, looking at what did and didn’t work for the group’s various stores. “Something’s that worked well last year, which we will continue, include Uber in partnership with Makro, offering a R50 discount on rides to and from their stores,” it said. The group said that it had also seen success with its mobile point-of-sale system which allowed shoppers to complete their purchase anywhere in the store instead of standing in queues. “Our research also found that a significant amount of customers preferred stores to open for longer during this trading period,” it said. “As such we will once again have extended trading hours at selected stores. For instance, 93 out of 122 Game stores in SA, and 13 out of the 28 on the rest of the continent will be trading at midnight. “We will also have 29 Game stores trading from 06hoo. As with previous years we will have a standard delivery fee regardless of radius to our stores. A delivery fee of R90 will be charged across Game, DionWired and Makro stores.” Read: Takealot’s big plans for Black Friday 2019 