In the highly competitive marketplace, small businesses need to capture the potential of digital connectivity to remain ahead of their game. Ensuring that access to the Internet is seamless and reliable can provide retailers and the hospitality market with the ability to secure and retain customer loyalty. “We are seeing more small businesses deploying innovative solutions like their larger counterparts to create value, reduce costs, mitigate risks, and build customer confidence. We believe that by putting the power of fast and reliable Wi-Fi into business owners’ hands it will drive customers to them. For a customer, nothing quite beats being able to hold a conference call characterised by crystal clarity, or easily sharing pictures on their latest purchase with friends and family,” said Warren Gordon, business unit manager for Aruba at Duxbury Networking. Click here to get superior connectivity for your business. Gordon points out that with models designed for indoor, outdoor, and hospitality or Small Office Home Office (SOHO) environments there’s an option that meets any need. All models are easy to set up, provide a strong signal and have built-in security features for a worry-free user experience. Business owners can quickly set up, manage and monitor their network with the Aruba Instant On app on an iOS or Android enabled smart device. “Research shows that 50% of shoppers expect store owners to offer free Wi-Fi and 49% of business travellers base their hotel choice on free Wi-Fi availability. Add to this the fact that good Wi-Fi increases employee productivity by 16%, it’s plain to see that a fast, cost-effective and reliable network tool like Aruba Instant On is an asset to any small business,” says Gordon. For retailers, network connectivity, security and linking to the Internet are critical operating requirements. Point of Sale (PoS) systems, payroll, inventory control, customer access, and other services keep these businesses growing. The in-store wireless network is vital to both staff and shoppers. The Aruba Instant On AP11 is perfect for the small boutique, coffee shop, real estate office or medical practice. The boutique hospitality industry will benefit from deploying an AP12, AP11D or AP17 access point for seamless indoor and outdoor access and coverage. “Guests understandably want fast, secure, and customisable wireless access. The Aruba Instant On provides a smooth in-room Wi-Fi experience that will keep both staff and guests happy. Simple software tuning ensures Netflix and security cameras, key systems or other operational systems are seamlessly integrated,” says Gordon. SOHO business owners depend on flawless Internet connections to grow and sustain their businesses. There is often a need to connect a multitude of devices that could include cellular phones, high-performance laptops, interactive voice and video collaboration tools, as well as the latest wireless Internet of Things (IoT) devices such as Apple TVs for displays and wireless printers. The Aruba Instant On AP15 is built for high-density workplaces where mobile is preferred and the increasing number of endpoints, cloud apps, and higher volumes of data must be able to deliver the performance that keeps employees and devices working optimally. “With Aruba Instant On, business owners acquire premium hardware and software that is scalable and supports the growth of emerging apps and IoT, while delivering the best user and IT experience possible. From the operations side of things, mobility and apps that always work keep employees engaged and performing at their best. And when customers and employees are happy, it lets business owners focus on building their businesses,” says Gordon. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za  This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.