Online retailer Takealot has outlined its plans for Black Friday 2019 – including an early sale. Set to fall on 29 November, Black Friday marks the start of the festive season for many retailers and has proven to be a record-breaking sales day for both Takealot and Superbalist. Takealot said that its ‘Blue Dot Sale’ will run over a five day period starting on Black Friday (29 November). It will see a range of new deals throughout the weekend as well as on Cyber Monday (2 December) and Takealot Tuesday (3 December) with up to 60% off thousands of items. For the first time, Takealot said it will also be giving their shoppers exclusive early access to some of its Black Friday deals starting on the 24 November. The group said that these early-access deals will be heavily discounted and will not see further price cuts when the actual Black Friday sale starts. Plans Takealot CEO Kim Reid said that this year he is anticipating the biggest Black Friday yet, a culmination of months of tech and operational business-wide focus to prepare for increased predicted traffic and shopper volumes. Takealot’s Black Friday gross merchandise value (GMV) grew 125% from 2017 to 2018, with orders up 127%. Superbalist’s Black Friday GMV has grown on average around 50%. Reid says throughout the year they have been working to scale operations across multiple areas within the business. “After expanding our Johannesburg distribution centre (DC), our warehouse storage space now stands at 75 000m 2 . We house over 3.7 million items at any given time, and have opened 47 Takealot Pickup Points in the Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Gauteng, Kwa-Zulu Natal, Limpopo, Free State and Mpumalanga for order collections and returns, with more to open in the coming months.” The Takealot group anticipates they’ll travel over 4 million km from Black Friday until 24 December. “To put that in context, it is the equivalent of circumnavigating the globe over 100 times” said Reid. Superbalist Superbalist’s Showdown sale will run from the 29 November to 3 December with up to 70% off more than 15 000+ items. The groups said that Superbalist shoppers will also have early access to Black Friday deals on selected days throughout November with Superbalist’s Black Friday Spoilers. These 24 hours to shop deals also won’t be beaten on Black Friday, it said. Read: Dion Wired’s big plans for Black Friday 2019 