Pick n Pay will launch its new Smart Shopper ‘smart price’ programme on Black Friday (29 November). John Bradshaw, retail executive for marketing at Pick n Pay, said that Smart Price will give customers instant savings on selected products when swiping their Smart Shopper card, in addition to the points they will earn. He said that these products will be clearly marked in-store or in the Black Friday catalogue. Below is Pick n Pay’s brochure with some of the smart price deals included. Pick n Pay Inland by BusinessTech on Scribd  For more deals for different regions, mobile and Pick n Pay Hyper, check out our previous story here. Plans for Black Friday Pick n Pay’s Black Friday deals will run over a three-day period until 1 December 2019. All stores across the country will open at 05h59 on Black Friday and Pick n Pay’s online shop (www.pnp.co.za) will launch Black Friday deals at midnight. Bradshaw said that customers can expect discounts of up to 60% across all categories, including everyday food and pantry items, toiletries, baby and household products, clothing, liquor, electronics and appliances. Based on a recent Pick n Pay poll, he expects customers to shop similarly to last year. When asked what sort of deals customers were hoping to see at Pick n Pay’s Black Friday this year, the majority (33%) listed groceries. This was followed by wine and liquor (26%), appliances (21%) and tech and gadgets (20%). “Last year many customers used Black Friday deals as an opportunity to refill their pantries. Popular items included long-life milk, sugar, coffee, rice washing power and toilet paper. We will once again offer customers great savings on everyday items, such as bread, meat, and yogurt. “We also saw many customers using Black Friday as an opportunity to buy early Christmas gifts, or bigger items that they have been saving up for, such as a television or new appliances, like a fridge or dishwasher. Having worked closely with their suppliers for months, Bradshaw believes they have sufficient stock of popular products for their Black Friday weekend. “For instance, we have enough stock of UHT long-life milk to pour more than 40 million glasses.” “After months of planning to ensure our stores are adequately stocked and prepared, we are excited to open our doors early on Friday and welcome customers in stores across the country. “To deliver the best Black Friday shopping experience, we will have more staff in stores to manage deliveries, assist customers on the floor, and ensure that every till point is open to minimise queue times,” he said. Read: Here are the biggest Black Friday mobile deals from MTN, Vodacom, and more 