Vodacom CFO Till Streichert has resigned only days after the company announced that its CTO Andries Delport would be leaving. MyBroadband learned about Streichert’s resignation on Wednesday, but Vodacom could not officially confirm the resignation by the time of publication. It is understood that Vodacom will make an official announcement regarding Streichert’s resignation soon. Streichert was appointed as the chief financial officer and an executive director of Vodacom Group in August 2015 after working as the finance director at Vodacom SA from February 2014. He was also appointed as a non-executive director of Vodacom Tanzania, Vodafone Kenya, and Safaricom in August 2017. Industry veteran Streichert is an industry veteran in the telecoms and financial fields, and was awarded the 2017 CFO of the Year award by CFO South Africa. News of Streichert’s resignation followed only days after Vodacom CTO Andries Delport resigned from the company after 23 years of service. Delport will also relinquish his role as director of Vodacom Tanzania Limited and director of VMSA (Mozambique) when he leaves the company in May 2020. Delport has held a number of senior positions at Vodacom since joining the company in June 1996. He was appointed CTO of Vodacom in November 2010. He will join CIVH as Chief Technology Officer to help oversee Remgro’s telecommunication assets and the strategic direction of CIVH. Vodacom said it will announce a successor for the Group CTO position in due course. Vodacom was asked for feedback regarding Streichert’s resignation, but the company declined to comment. Vodacom official comment Vodacom confirmed Streichert’s resignation on Thursday morning, saying he will will leave the company in June 2020 “to pursue an external opportunity outside of Vodacom”. “He will step down from his role on the Vodacom Group Board at around the same time or at an earlier mutually agreed date,” Vodacom said. Vodacom CEO Shameel Joosub said Streichert has made a valuable contribution to the Vodacom group board and as a member of the executive committee. Streichert said after 12 years at Vodafone and six years with Vodacom, it is a decision that wasn’t taken lightly. “As I am only leaving around June next year, my first priority is to make sure that it is business as usual for the finance function while at the same time ensuring there is a seamless transition to the next CFO,” he said. Vodacom said it will announce a successor for the Group CFO position in due course. Source: MyBroadband. Read: Andries Delport resigns as Vodacom chief technology officer 