Labour federation Cosatu says it will support the partial privatisation of some state-owned enterprises (SOEs) if it means that workers will benefit. Speaking in an interview with City Press, the group said that partial privatisation should be carried out to prevent ailing SOEs from suffering further financial distress and having to rely on bailouts from government. “There has to be a comprehensive plan. Treasury needs to set out conditions which all the SOEs need to abide by. There also has to be a strict regime for those who run the SOEs because, collectively, we all agree that they should remain under state ownership,” said the federation’s spokesperson, Sizwe Pamla. “However, there has to be a process that identifies strategic SOEs because, as much as there are SOEs where we see no role for the private sector whatsoever, there are those where you can say: ‘Maybe we can invite the private sector as a minority partner.’ “The involvement of private investors could inject much-needed technology, capital or whatever else that is needed to revive the SOEs’ fortunes.” SAA The announcement comes after South African Airways (SAA) was summoned to a meeting with regulators in December to disclose details about talks with potential equity partners and give assurances that any deal won’t violate foreign-ownership laws. Under the Air Services Licensing Act of 1990, airlines must be at least three-quarters owned by South Africans to operate a domestic service. That would prevent international operators from buying more than a 25% stake from the government, unless the rules are changed. “We are going to be calling SAA to next month’s meeting to share with us what their plans are,” said Mike Mabasa, chairman of the Air Services Licensing Council, which regulates domestic aviation within South Africa. “If they are already in conversations with strategic equity partners we need to know what that entails.” Finance Minister Tito Mboweni said last month the government is talking with potential investors in SAA, which is technically insolvent and reliant on bailouts and other forms of state support to survive. Read: Back to business as usual: SAA 