Clientèle has launched Clientèle Mobile – a mobile service which offers data and airtime at discounted rates to its rewards members. Clientèle said that its mobile SIM cards are available to purchase at a cost of R30 and that each SIM card comes with 100MB of free data on activation. Clientèle Rewards members will also receive an additional 100MB after the first Rewards fee payment and another 100MB after the second rewards fee payment, it said. The service is a mobile virtual network operator (MVNO) service offered through Cell C. There are multiple packages available, and these will be added to overtime. Current packages include 50MB, 100MB, 300MB, 500MB, 1GB, 2GB, and 5GB. While Clientèle Mobile airtime is offered at any chosen amount. Clientèle said its pricing is already competitive and offers Clientèle Rewards members up to 20% additional discounts on data packages and between 25% and 35% discounts on airtime, depending on their rewards status. Special offer The first 10,000 members who purchase and activate their SIM card by 13 December 2019, will earn Clientèle Mobile ‘Founder Member’ status. This means founder members are guaranteed to always receive a minimum discount of 25% on airtime and 15% on data every time they recharge their SIM on the Clientèle app, irrespective of their rewards status and as long as their SIM card stays active. “South Africa’s smartphone penetration has nearly doubled over the last two years and is now sitting at over 80%, which means more people are looking for better data deals. This is an exceptionally exciting shift for us as a business and we believe that it will lead to great results,” said Basil Reekie, group managing director of Clientèle. “Clientèle Mobile offers South Africans an opportunity to get connected with their loved ones for less. Rewarding conversations are only a Clientèle Mobile SIM card away, so get yours today and access some of South Africa’s most affordable airtime and data deals.: Reekie said that Clientèle Mobile will be sold through agency, broker, telesales and IFA (the Network Marketing Division of Clientèle). While there will be an ability to SIM swop – for instance if a client loses their SIM card – there will be no porting of numbers from other networks on to Clientèle Mobile at first, although this service will be offered in due course. Non-rewards members will have access to Clientèle Mobile airtime and data at standard rates, which Clientèle claims are already competitive relative to the market, he said. Read: Remgro appoints Raymond Ndlovu as new CIVH chief executive 