A number of top South African retailers have published their Black Friday 2019 deals. Set to fall on 29 November, Black Friday has quickly become one of the most important shopping days of the year for both stores and customers. However, the fact that the Black Friday falls slightly later than usual this year means that more retailers are offering deals throughout the whole week. You can find some of the most notable deals below. CNA CNA has released its Black Friday deals for 2019. The group said that it will have another of deals on gaming and tech items, as well as a number of secret in-store deals. “One of the major benefits of shopping through CNA is you can buy your product on your Edgars Account and also earn ThankYou Points,” it said. “While not all offers are in all stores, we have over 160 stores countrywide that offer convenience for customers.” CNA said that its deals will break on 26 November, with more deals being released on Black Friday (29 November). You can find the CNA’s Black Friday pamphlet below. CNA Black Friday by BusinessTech on Scribd  Dion Wired Dion Wired said that it will have a number of deals on the latest technology and homeware with 21 stores opening for trade at midnight. It said that it will also have unique and special offers available through its online store. “We’ve secured deals on the best technology and appliances at the best prices. We’re known in the market for our prices on TVs and gaming – this year will be no different,” said Katherine Madley, brand and customer director at DionWired. She added that DionWired’s Black Friday leaflet will be released on 24 November. “We encourage shoppers to get to their nearest DionWired store early on Black Friday. “At DionWired we value the safety and security of our customers and staff. As such we have employed additional security and staff for Black Friday. “We also have exclusive online deals for customers, as well as specials on Cyber Monday – on 2 December.” You can find its full Black Friday pamphlet below. Dion Wired Black Friday by BusinessTech on Scribd  Makro Makro said that the preparations for South Africa’s biggest shopping day start months in advance. Makro added that Black Friday provides an opportunity to focus on certain new technologies and features that will help deal with the influx of shoppers. In 2018 this included an ‘online drive-thru service’ at the Makro Riversands store, with Makro focusing on checkout process in 2019. “We have been focusing on improving our checkout process by reducing queues through the mobile pay-point system,” it said, It added that it will also be focusing on special deals through its mobile app. “Our aim is to save customers money over the period. Look out for an even broader range of deals available through mRewards.” You can find the brochure below. Makro 5day 2019 1 to 10 by BusinessTech on Scribd  Makro 5day 2019 11 to 20 by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: Links to early Black Friday deals in South Africa 