Vehicle evaluation group True Price has published a new report comparing the resale value of South Africa’s two most popular motoring brands – Toyota and Volkswagen. The data is based on thousands of vehicles sold on auction around South Africa. True Price documents each and every price paid on auction, focusing on vehicles that have done a maximum of 150,000 km and were registered between 2016 and 2019. It then calculates the actual price achieved on auction as a percentage of the original list price to determine a resale value percentage. Using this data, True Price found that Toyota currently has the best resale value when including the sale of commercial vehicles – such as bakkies. However, it found that this advantage decreases significantly when only looking at passenger vehicles. Resale value of all vehicles This difference can be partly attributed to the popularity of the Toyota Hilux, said Darryl Jacobson, managing director of True Price. “Whenever a Hilux comes up on auction, it’s a case of bees to honey. Interest in these vehicles is always immense – on the part of both the private buyers and dealers too. “So, we wondered what would happen if we pitted Toyota’s passenger cars against Volkswagen’s passenger cars. “At 71.62%, Toyota still won this shootout. However, it didn’t win by a large margin – because Volkswagen achieved 70.65%,” he said. Jacobson said that these results convey a number of key messages. “Firstly, both brands are trusted, and they have excellent resale values. However, when it comes to Volkswagen, its passenger cars and commercial vehicles have similar resale values. “This is perhaps understandable. A vehicle such as the Amarok is more of a leisure vehicle than a workhorse. With Toyota, however, there is a marked difference between the resale values of its passenger cars and its commercial vehicles. “In fairness, this is probably because the Hilux is just such an incredible performer when it comes to resale values; not even Toyota’s passenger cars can keep pace,” he said. Read: Top 10 most searched-for budget city cars under R140,000 