Officials at the Indian Council of Medical Research say they’ve successfully completed clinical testing of the world’s first injectable male contraceptive, Vox reports. The product is a nonsurgical vasectomy called reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance or RISUG. The procedure requires an injection into the vas deferens, the vessel which carries sperm. It is similar to vasectomy in that a local anaesthetic is administered, an incision is made in the scrotum, and the vasa deferentia are injected with a polymer gel. However, this process is completely reversible. “The product is ready, with only regulatory approvals pending with India’s drug regulator,” said Radhey Shyam Sharma, a New Delhi reproductive biologist who leads the research. “The product can safely be called the world’s first male contraceptive.” Tests In March, a new male birth control pill passed tests of safety and tolerability after healthy men used it daily for a month. The Phase 1 study results were presented on March 24 at the Endocrine Society’s annual meeting in New Orleans. Stephanie Page, a professor of medicine at the University of Washington School of Medicine, jointly led the study with Christina Wang, a professor of medicine at UCLA in Los Angeles. Study results indicate that the experimental male oral contraceptive decreased sperm production while preserving libido. The pill is called 11-beta-methyl-19-nortestosterone dodecylcarbonate, or 11-beta-MNTDC. It is a modified testosterone that has the combined actions of a male hormone (androgen) and a progesterone. The study involved 40 healthy men across two sites: UW Medical Centre in Seattle and the Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute in Torrance, Calif. Ten study participants randomly received a placebo capsule, and 30 others received 11-beta-MNTDC at one of two doses; 14 men received 200 mg and 16 got the 400 mg dose. Subjects took the drug or placebo once daily for 28 days. Read: South Africa to introduce NHI at an ‘affordable pace’ 