South African Airways (SAA) has extended the cancellation of all domestic and regional flights scheduled for Sunday (17 November) and Monday (18 November). The airline, which is currently facing industrial action, says this is an operational decision aimed at minimising the impact of disruptions on the airline’s customers. It added that it plans to reintroduce international flights. “The airline is pleased to announce that it is aiming to operate all international flights, departing from OR Tambo International Airport, with effect from Sunday (17 November) and customers should report to OR Tambo International Airport as normal,” it said. “Departures from SAA’s international stations, including; London, New York, Washington, Munich, Frankfurt and Hong Kong, are expected to operate from Monday, 18 November 2019. “The first departure from São Paulo, is expected to operate on Sunday, 17 November 2019.  The first departure from Perth, is expected to operate on Tuesday, 19 November 2019.” SAA said it has also worked with its sister airline, Mango Airlines, to re-accommodate as many customers as possible travelling on domestic services. This may mean changes in timing and aircraft types, but aims to ensure that SAA’s customers reach their intended destination with minimal disruption, it said. “Customers travelling to destinations in the regional market (points on the African continent) will be re-accommodated on Airlink, a partner airline of SAA, and other airlines where possible. However, it will not be possible to re-accommodate all customers.” Travel changes “Passengers are advised to follow the commercial policies SAA has put in place, which can be found on www.flysaa.com.  Customers are requested not to travel to their departure airports unless in possession of a rebooked itinerary, as SAA will not be able to provide any assistance,” said Philip Saunders, SAA chief commercial officer. Saunders said to minimise the impact on customers, SAA is proactively rebooking customers and providing various options. He added that call centre hours have been extended from 06h00 to midnight, South African time. “As call volumes are very high, we urge customers only to contact SAA in the event they wish to rebook on another airline for immediate travel. “Customers seeking a refund or wishing to rebook their travel on a future SAA service have until 30 November 2019 to finalise their arrangements,” he said. Read: Government ready to make tough decisions on SAA: Gordhan 