GoDaddy has launched of a new professional email solution in South Africa, which enables business owners to easily create an email address that matches their domain name. The service features built-in tools to help clients run their businesses more efficiently. “It is a great way to highlight the name of your company or project in the inboxes where your emails land, the web hosting company said. GoDaddy said that the email service offers a modern look and a clean interface and features a responsive design that works equally well whether you’re working on desktop, laptop, tablet, or on your mobile phone. Additionally, GoDaddy Professional Email syncs data across all of your devices automatically so your email, calendar, and tasks are always up-to-date. It is compatible with the email client of your choice, including Outlook, Apple Mail, and Android email programs. “With our solution, you can get up-and-running with an email address with your company’s distinct domain name quickly and easily,” said Selina Bieber, regional director for Turkey and MENA at GoDaddy EMEA. “Having your professional-looking business email address can be a powerful branding tool, and helps you be recognized by your customers. It can also give your company more credibility when you’re corresponding with existing and potential customers.” The Professional Email Individual plan, currently offered for R12,00 per month/user, features: Email address that matches your domain so your email address looks professional and reinforces the name of your business;
10 GB of email storage;
Mobile-friendly webmail with customisable web portal;
Calendar, contacts and tasks to help you stay organised;
Works with the email app of your choice – so you can still use your favourite email program;
No distracting advertisements, unlike free email. The Professional Email Team plan comes with 25 GB of email storage and allows everyone on your team the ability to share and collaborate with each other, GoDaddy said. Read: GoDaddy expands presence in South Africa for small businesses 