Parliament’s land reform committee met on Wednesday (6 November) to gather insights from legal experts and stakeholders about how it should amend Section 25 of the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation. In its presentation, the Parliamentary Legal Services said that there are effectively two ways in which the committee could amend the Constitution: amending the current sections, or inserting a new subsection. You can find a brief explanation of these two options outlined below. Option one – Amend the current subsections Section 25(2) of the Constitution currently states that: Section 25(3) states that: Option one is to amend subsections (2)(b) and (3)(b) with the proviso that a court may determine that no compensation is payable in the event of expropriation of land for the purpose of land reform, the Parliamentary Legal Services team said. “Where compensation is payable, the amount of the compensation and the time and manner of payment must be just and equitable, reflecting an equitable balance between the public interest and the interests of those affected, having regard to all relevant circumstances,” it said. Option two – Insert a new subsection According to the team, this subsection would effectively fit in after the above subsections in Section 25 of the Constitution. It provided the following example of how this new subsection may read: While it did not indicate which option it found the most preferable, the committee said that it is confident it will meet the deadline of March 2020. “This lies at the heart of our nation-building project,” said committee chairperson, Dr Mathole Motshekga “We must put aside our vested interests and put the interest of all South Africans, both black and white, first. This is a legacy challenge created by people who are no more” Motshekga said it is unfair that 13% of the land is in the hands of the minority. He however made it clear that the “original sin of land dispossession” was started by “British imperialism”. Read: New bill on land expropriation without compensation may be out for public comment over Christmas 