Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Former DA leader Mmusi Maimane has announced he will return to politics – though in what capacity remains a mystery. Maimane was speaking at an event funded by the billionaire Oppenheimer family, where he said that SA politics was in desperate need of disruption, and the economy and social stability needed unity. DA insiders said he attended the event seeking funding for a new political movement. [Mail & Guardian] The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants will today start a disciplinary hearing for former Transnet and Eskom CFO Anoj Singh, who faces 18 charges of misconducts. Singh has already been suspended from the group, pending the outcome of this hearing, but could face further sanctions including fines and expulsion. Singh’s name has turned up in many testimonies of wrongdoing at Eskom and Transnet. [Media24] While former president Jacob Zuma says the pubic protector is welcome to his tax records, the court battle to get them has opened up a lot of questions over which authorities may actually get access to such data. According to SARS head Edward Kieswetter the public protector is definitely not one of them, and doing so would be a criminal offence. However, ignoring the request is also illegal – hence why the matter headed to court. [702] South Africa’s rand weakened in late trade on Tuesday in a subdued session as investors avoided big bets ahead of local retail and mining data later in the week, and a definitive sign from the trade talks between China and the United States. On Wednesday, the rand was trading at R14.93 to the dollar, R19.18 to the pound and R16.45 to the euro. KwaZulu-Natal authorities are dispatching emergency services to New Hanover, Pietermaritzburg, following a tornado hitting the area on Tuesday afternoon. The South African weather service confirmed the event, with a video of the tornado doing the rounds online. Authorities are still unsure of the total damage caused, or if there were any lives lost. The video is below. [EWN] 