Jobs website Glassdoor has published a list of questions you should ask as part of the job interview process. According to the group, anything can happen before or during an interview, which is why it’s crucial to walk in feeling prepared. However, it noted it is important not to ask questions already answered in the job description and to go beyond those general duties to understand everything the job entails. Heather Huhman broke down the questions you should ask at each stage of your job interview. Your role 1. Can you offer specific details about the position’s day-to-day responsibilities? 2. What would my first week at work look like? 3. How does this position contribute to the organisation’s success? 4. What do you hope I will accomplish in this position? 5. How does the company culture affect this role? 6. What job shadowing opportunities are available for an applicant before they accept an offer? Getting to know the interviewer 7. What do you enjoy most about working here? 8. Why are you working in this industry? 9. Can you walk me through your typical work day? 10. What is your greatest accomplishment with the company? 11. What is your team’s greatest accomplishment? 12. What goals do you have for the company, yourself, and employees over the next five years? 13. What hobbies do you have outside of the office? Management’s style 14. How do leaders encourage employees to ask questions? 15. How do leaders set employees up for success? 16. How does employee feedback get incorporated into day-to-day operations? 17. How does management deliver negative feedback to employees? Company culture 18. What is your work culture like? 19. How would you describe the work environment here? 20. What benefits are focused on work-life balance? 21. What benefits and perks does the company offer? 22. What is the outline of your telecommuting policy? 23. How frequently do employees make themselves available outside of normal working hours? Company reputation 24. What’s your mission statement? 25. How often is a new hire the result of a previous employee quitting? 26. Why do most employees leave the company? 27. How would employees describe the company and its leaders? 28. What are the company’s biggest problems? How are they overcoming them? 29. What do you want the company to be known for among employees — past, present, and future? Performance measurements 30. How are employees recognised for their hard work? 31. How involved are employees in the structuring of their own goals and tasks? 32. What are your views on goals, timelines, and measuring success? 33. How often are employees expected to provide status updates on a project? 34. How often do you evaluate employee performance? Future co-workers 35. Can you tell me about the team I’ll be working with? 36. How competitive are your employees? 37. How do you develop teamwork skills among employees? Opportunities for growth 38. What type of mentor system do you have in place? 39. What type of educational/training opportunities does the company offer? 40. What advancement opportunities are available? 41. How do leaders promote employee growth and success? 42. What does it take to be a top performer at this company? Moving forward 43. What’s the next step of this process, and when can I expect to hear from you? 44. Is there any other information I can provide you with? 45. Would you like to see more examples of my work? Read: These are the most in-demand job skills in South Africa right now 