Pick n Pay has launched exclusive ‘teaser’ deals for its online customers across Gauteng and the Western Cape in the lead up to Black Friday on 29 November. The ‘Black November’ deals will go live on Pick n Pay’s online shop every Monday at 07h00 and will be valid for seven days or until stocks last, the retailer said. It said that the deals will offer up to 50% off across various categories including groceries, appliances, electronics, wine and liquor, household items and baby essentials. “Many customers signed up for our Black Friday emailer ahead of the time and logged onto the website minutes before new deals launched,” says John Bradshaw, retail executive for marketing at Pick n Pay. “Customers really enjoyed the opportunity to shop for different products throughout the month and not just on one day.” Brashaw said that due to last year’s popularity, the retailer has put extra measures in place to serve as many customers as quickly as possible. “We’ve worked hard to offer more deals across more categories this year, so that there is something for everyone. “We’ve also enhanced our online shopping experience to make it easier for customers to find the deals they are after. For example, customers can easily shop the deals by the categories they are interested in,” he said. Delivery Bradshaw said that  Pick n Pay’s online delivery capacity has also been ramped up to avoid any delays in customers getting their items. “Black November saver delivery” slots will be available from this Saturday. This will be at a discounted rate and the customer’s order will be delivered during the day on their selected date. Should customers prefer to know when their order will arrive, they can still select from the typical morning or afternoon delivery slots. “We wanted to make it easy and accessible for our customers to get great deals on their favourite or most wanted items ahead of Black Friday. Customers can conveniently shop from their home and have it delivered to their door at a time that suits them,” said Bradshaw. The PnP Black November online deals will run weekly from 4 to 25 November 2019 and are exclusive to online Western Cape and Gauteng customers in the areas covered by Pick n Pay’s online shop delivery network. Read: Black Friday 2019 deals from some of South Africa’s biggest retail brands 