Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, Khaya Magaxa, says that recent comments made about the safety of South African Airways (SAA) are reckless and aim to sabotage the national carrier. This follows claims by the South African Cabin Crew Association (Sacca) and the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) that the airline brought in inexperienced staff to run operations during the planned strike. “Whilst the committee supports the rights of employees to strike within the confines of labour laws, it is irresponsible for the unions to make comments that the flights will be operated by short-term contracted personnel without the requisite experience,” Magaxa said. This was reiterated by the airline’s acting chief executive officer, Zuks Ramasia, who called on the unions to retract the untruthful and unfounded allegations that flying the national carrier is in any way unsafe. “SAA has a proven safety record and we have an unwavering commitment to safety. The safety and security of passengers and crew is the highest single priority to SAA. We do not compromise on that.” She said SAA was the first airline in the world to train its pilots on ‘upset recovery training’, and its instructors train airlines around the world. “We remain committed to ensuring the highest levels of safety and security on all our flights. It is important to state that SAA is mindful of its obligations to comply with all regulations and continue to ensure safe and secure operations. “SAA will, therefore, maintain the required levels of personnel, including oversight post holders and necessary compliance training during this strike period,” she said. Strike action On Saturday, the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) met with SAA and the unions to discuss the strike action. “The CCMA commissioners ended a long day’s proceedings, tasking the company to consider options on the way forward and the company will then revert to the commissioners in due course. The Commissioners will then reconvene the discussions between the parties,” Ramasia said. She said since the unions gave SAA 48 hours notice to strike on Tuesday (12 November) their demands have been amended three times. “The company has written two letters to these two unions requesting clarity on what exactly they are demanding on behalf of their members, to ensure that there is no confusion and/or uncertainty,” Ramasia said. Numsa and Sacca have demanded an 8% salary increase. “This is the only lawful demand made by Numsa and Sacca under the current strike notices. The company has advised that the airline cannot afford to pay any salary increases. “However, it has offered the unions a 5.9% salary increase effective in the March 2020 pay month. In addition, the company will pay the first six months back-pay, from 1 April 2019 to 30 September 2019, in March 2020; and the remaining six months back-pay in April 2020, provided that SAA has received funds to do so,” Ramasia said. She said SAA has repeatedly communicated the precarious financial position of the company, the negative and dire ramifications that the company – and, by implication, each and every employee – would be exposed to by employees engaging in industrial action. Read: SAA to meet with regulators over possible sale 