The Department of Basic Education has published its new scripted lessons plans which will be used as part of its pilot phase on sexual education. The pilot of the Comprehensive Sexuality Education (CSE) will be trialled in selected schools that have recorded high HIV infection rates and prevalence of sexual abuse, the department said in a statement on Wednesday (13 November). Government’s lesson plan has previously come under fire from critics and parents, who argue that the lesson plans are overtly sexual and are not appropriate for the classroom. However, the department said that this is not the case and that no new content that has been added to the Life Orientation subject in schools. “The Comprehensive Sexuality Education has been part of the curriculum since the year 2000,” it said. “The only change is that in 2015 the DBE developed Scripted Lesson Plans (SLPs) which are currently being tested in five (5) provinces in order to strengthen the teaching of CSE in schools. SLPs are learner and teacher support materials (LTSMs) that are designed to aid teachers and learners to address these important topics in a systematic manner.” The department said that during teaching and learning time, educators are guided by scripted lessons plans that empower them to discuss topics that could otherwise be found to be uncomfortable. “The SLP describes each activity, the materials needed for the activity as well as how to complete the activity, the duration of the activity, the information to be presented, and the points that should be emphasized. “The core aim of the CSE and its SLPs is to ensure that we help learners build an understanding of concepts, content, values and attitudes related to sexuality, sexual behavior change as well as leading safe and healthy lives.” You can find the full list of lesson plans and educator guides outlined below: Grade 4 Learner Book
Grade 4 Educator Guide
Grade 5 Learner Book
Grade 5 Educator Guide
Grade 6 Learner Book
Grade 6 Educator Guide
Grade 7 Learner Book
Grade 7 Educator Guide
Grade 8 Learner Book
Grade 8 Educator Guide
Grade 9 Learner Book
Grade 9 Educator Guide
Grade 10 Learner Book
Grade 10 Educator Guide
Grade 11 Learner Book
Grade 11 Educator Guide
Grade 12 Learner Book
Grade 12 Educator Guide Read: South Africa’s university pass rate shocker 