Flight Centre has lined up a mountain of great savings for savvy travellers this Black Friday. With exclusive online-only deals and discounted packages available at your nearest Flight Centre store, it’s the perfect time to pick up a dream holiday for less. “Whether you’re a frequent traveller looking to book your Easter 2020 break or are hoping to explore a new country next year, scoop up great travel savings,” says Sue Garrett, General Manager of Marketing and Product at the Flight Centre Travel Group. Visit any Flight Centre retail outlet across the country, open from 07h00 until 19h00 on Black Friday, for more great savings, ideal for travellers who prefer to consult with an expert face-to-face. Find your nearest Flight Centre store here: https://www.flightcentre.co.za/stores. Black Friday shoppers can enjoy savings of up to: 60% off tours
30% off cruises
50% off local getaways Flight Centre is also offering big discounts on popular beach packages: Phuket from R7,460
Bali from R8,090
Mauritius from R9,890
Zanzibar from R7,650 Wondering which deal will suit you best? Here are just a few pointers to help narrow down your list and bag the perfect holiday: Want a genuinely seamless trip? Visit spectacular destinations and immerse yourself fully in the culture and all the attractions by joining a guided holiday tour. All the new friends you’ll make along the way is just a bonus. Get a value for money holiday to multiple destinations in just one go. Unpack once and discover why cruising is the fastest-growing leisure travel segment. Local is lekker year-round. Make the most of 2020’s public holidays by taking a strategic day or two of leave and snagging an extra-long weekend away. For delicious cuisine, island hopping and famous beaches, think Thailand, a South African favourite in Southeast Asia. Embrace rice paddy selfies and the fresh-air lifestyle in Bali and spend your days relaxing, exploring and surfing off the many islands. Just a four-hour hop from Jo’burg and visa-free, Mauritius needs no filter. Think swaying palm trees and Instagram-perfect beaches. Sultry Zanzibar is another popular choice. Easily accessible from South Africa and visa-free, relax at your resort or wander the streets of the old Stone Town. Get your passport ready and prepare to snag the holiday of your dreams. For more information, visit https://www.flightcentre.co.za/promotions/black-friday.  This article was published in partnership with Flight Centre.