Community Investment Ventures Holdings (CIVH) has announced that Raymond Ndlovu is its new CEO and will lead the company’s newly-announced executive team. Ndlovu has extensive corporate and entrepreneurial experience in the financial services industry, including investment banking, asset management, and stockbroking. He has held senior management positions with several organisations, namely Prodigy Asset Management, Metropolitan Life, and Standard Chartered Merchant Bank. Ndlovu also co-founded and was CEO of an institutional stockbroking firm, Noah, for 10 years until July 2011. In 2013, he joined the venture investment division of the Remgro group, Invenfin, as an investment executive – before being reassigned to the parent company, Remgro Limited. Leading a dream team In an interview with MyBroadband, Ndlovu said they have assembled an excellent management team to build CIVH into South Africa’s leading open-access telecommunications provider. Former Vodacom CEO and Remgro executive Pieter Uys is chairman of the company, and CIVH’s executives are: Raymond Ndlovu – CEO
Andries Delport – CTO
Kobus Viljoen – CFO
Neo Moshimane – CCO Ndlovu highlighted that these executives are all leaders in their respective fields, which means CIVH is well positioned to take advantage of opportunities in the South African telecommunications market. Big opportunities in the South African telecoms market Ndlovu said they are upbeat about the prospects in the South African telecoms market, especially in the open-access environment. He said CIVH will continue to invest in fibre-to-the-home and fibre-to-the-business, which includes rolling out fibre in lower-income areas like Mitchells Plain. The company is also looking at opportunities in the data centre, tower infrastructure, and open-access wireless network market. One of its biggest prospects, however, is becoming part of the government’s new Wireless Open Access Network (WOAN). As an open-access mobile network it fits perfectly into CIVH’s telecoms portfolio, and Ndlovu said they believe the WOAN can add great value to the local telecoms environment. With Uys and Delport’s skills in the mobile market, its fibre infrastructure through Vumatel and DFA, and its other telecoms infrastructure like Vumacam towers, it is well-positioned to make the WOAN a reality. What is clear from the discussion with Ndlovu is that CIVH is serious about becoming a big player in the local telecoms market, and with its excellent management team success is essentially guaranteed. Source: MyBroadband Read: Till Streichert resigns as Vodacom chief financial officer 