There is a lot of content out there that will claim to solve your CV woes. However, the truth is, there is no quick fix for a resume in need and you should steer clear of anyone who claims otherwise, says Glassdoor’s Rachel Fletcher. “With an average of 250 applications received per open role, hiring managers have seen countless resumes and have a keen eye for the sneaky secrets applicants may use to try to slide through,” she said. “If you’re thinking of trying one of these resume tricks, you may want to think again.” Visual distractions While a strong template can definitely grab attention and help you stand out, be very discerning when it comes to visual elements that “pop.” This also goes for loud colours, graphics, and charts, said Fletcher. “Unless you are in a field like graphic design, subtlety will be the name of the game. And remember, elaborate formatting can often render your resume unreadable by applicant tracking systems,” she said. “It should also be noted that including a headshot on your resume is a practice of the past. Doing so can open the door to many types of discrimination, and employers may reject your CV immediately just to prevent potential accusations.” Keyword overload Adding a keyword section to highlight your specific skill set is a great way to ensure that your resume will make it past an applicant tracking system – it can also make sure that a hiring manager can easily locate the required skills for the role on your CV. “A bad idea, however, is adding a keyword section so expansive that it attempts to veil a thin work history,” said Fletcher. “Hiring managers can see through this easily. After all, it doesn’t matter how many keywords and proficiencies you include in your resume if you don’t have the accomplishments (with evidence) to back them up.” Length This failed resume trick is especially relevant for mid- and senior-level professionals, said Fletcher. “If your strategy is to wow hiring managers with your full career history, you may want to rethink your approach. “One of the most common resume mistakes job seekers make is believing that length denotes ability. “However, while you may have over 20 years of experience, a hiring manager is not going to be interested in the day-to-day responsibilities of your entry-level role.” The appropriate length of your resume is dependent on where you are in your career, but the standard is two pages, said Fletcher. “Overall, being brief and selective about the experience you include will ensure readability and demonstrate that you know what accomplishments are most important for the role you’re applying to,” she said. Personal information Any personal information aside from your contact information (read: email, phone number, LinkedIn URL, and city and state of residence) has no place on a modern resume, said Fletcher. “Details about interests and hobbies, family life, or colourful jokes will not entertain or delight a hiring manager, nor will these elements provide a better understanding of your personality in a way that is valuable to the hiring process. “Venturing into the area of creative writing can be risky and, if at all, should be contained to a cover letter.” Read: New paternity leave changes coming soon – here’s what you need to know