When buying a computer, it is important to take all your needs and desires into consideration. As part of this, choosing a brand that offers what you require should be one of your first priorities. HP is one of the leading computer brands in the world and has been competing in the industry for over 50 years. If you’re looking to replace your current laptop or desktop computer, HP is a great option. Here are eleven reasons why you should buy an HP computer. HP has been one of the leading computer manufacturers for decades, and has developed a reputation for providing reliable, high-quality computers. This is reassuring – particularly for users who are reliant on their laptop operating smoothly and consistently for work purposes. HP continues to be at the forefront of the personal computer market. Laptop Mag placed HP as one of its top two laptop brands of 2018. “A combination of very good overall review scores, great design and a wide variety of laptop options for every price range helped HP shine,” said Laptop Mag. HP also boasts a market share of over 22% in the PC market, meaning that it customers are aware of HP’s reputation and high-quality products. HP is well-respected in the PC and laptop markets for its classy, attractive computers. “HP knows how to make a pretty laptop, and you see it from the company’s entry-level Pavilion line to its ZBook and EliteBook business lines,” said Laptop Mag. “Almost every machine is a stunner.” The HP x360 range of convertible laptops in South Africa are another great example of HP’s fantastic design, looking phenomenal regardless of which mode you use them in – be it notebook, tent, stand, or tablet mode. Due to HP’s large portfolio and established strength in the computer market, it is able to cater to a wide variety of customer needs. Whether you’re looking for an affordable computer to surf the net and read emails, or a powerful machine to perform high-intensity tasks – HP has the solution for you. HP computers are some of the most reliable machines on the market, but if you encounter any issues, HP has a great support team that is well-equipped to help you out. If your laptop needs repairs and is under warranty, HP will even pay for the shipping costs involved in getting it fixed. HP takes the reliability of their computers very seriously. Throughout their decades of experience, they have refined their manufacturing and design process, ensuring that they deliver products that are geared towards lasting. This is no better proof of HP computers’ reliability than the military testing that many of them have undertaken. These tests include being dropped from a height of 30 inches no less than 26 times onto all sides, angles and edges; being exposed to sudden electric shocks; and other tests relating to elements such as temperature, altitude, and humidity. HP is a market leader when it comes to computer security. They offer a variety of powerful features to ensure that their customers’ data remains secure. These include: HP Sure Start – BIOS auto-recovery protection that uses hardware-enforced self-healing technology.
HP Sure Run – Ensures that your critical applications and processes run even if malicious parties try to shut them down.
HP Sure Recover – Restore an image of your PC using a network connection.
HP Sure Click – Protects your PC from infected files on websites.
HP Sure View – Instant protection against visual hacking. Not only does HP provide computers that you can rely on; they’re also one of the market leaders at finding new and improved technologies to improve user experience. Recently HP announced that it had designed a dual-screen gaming laptop that allows users to view other content while simultaneously using the traditional screen. This opens a wide array of potential new uses, such as being able to keep a chat window open with your friends while playing a game. HP’s innovation is especially powerful when it comes to its displays. HP monitors are known to offer crisp, clear visuals with a fantastic colour profile. HP has also made some bold moves in recent months, including the launches of a massive 65-inch G-Sync gaming monitor and a 240Hz screen on its Omen 15 gaming laptop – the first of its kind across all brands. HP computers offer seemingly endless features across the various ranges they come in. From 240Hz high-end gaming displays to the multiple modes that can be used with their x360 convertible notebooks – if you’re looking for a feature in a laptop, you’re sure to find that HP has a product that meets your needs. Due to being one of the biggest computer brands in the world, HP is an easy brand to find in both physical and online marketplaces. This also makes it much easier to fix should something go wrong. Pinnacle are one of the leading distributors of HP desktop and laptop computers in South Africa. They offer a broad catalogue of HP’s leading products, including Elitebooks and ZBooks. Visit their website today to find the best HP laptop for your needs. This article was published in partnership with HPI Pinnacle Digital.