The ANC’s integrity commission has called on 23 senior leaders to step down – leading to a major backlash from within the party. The Sunday Times reports that several ANC bigwigs are threatening a revolt unless the commission withdraws its findings, and some want it to be disbanded entirely. According to the paper, some of the names in the commission’s report include: Deputy president – David Mabuza;
Umkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association president – Kebby Maphatsoe;
Former state security minister – Bongani Bongo;
ANC Women’s League president – Bathabile Dlamini; While some of those implicated on the list say they are being targeted as part of ANC factionalism, secretary-general Ace Magashule has indicated that the report was a ‘work in progress’ and is still yet to be formally tabled. He said that the commission was still working on a final report to be discussed at the next meeting of the national executive committee (NEC). “People are going to resign from parliament, but for other reasons – for pensions, redeployment and factions – not because the integrity commission said they must resign,” he said. New cabinet David Mabuza was reappointed as South Africa’s deputy president at the 11th hour, as he cleared his name from the integrity commission’s watchlist before being sworn in as an MP. He will be working under Ramaphosa in a restructured cabinet which has seen the number of ministries cut down from 36 to 28. Before the restructuring, South Africa’s cabinet comprised 72 people, including the president, his deputy, ministers and deputy ministers – an outlier among countries of the same size and economy. The new cabinet will now be made up of 64 members – including Ramaphosa, Mabuza, 28 ministers and 34 deputies. When Cyril Ramaphosa was first elected as president of the country on 15 February 2018, he quickly announced a cabinet reshuffle on 26 February in which many ministers from the Zuma administration were removed from their posts. However, due to the internal politics of the ANC – which was deeply divided over the election of its president – many controversial figures seen to be loyal to the previous president were retained. A second cabinet reshuffle came in November 2018, following the death of minister Edna Molewa and the resignation of Malusi Gigaba. With the new cabinet, several notable names are now absent – including Nomvula Mokonyane and Bathabile Dlamini, whose inclusion in the ANC’s parliamentary lists drew criticism due to accusations of corruption and maladministration levelled against them. Read: Full list – here is Ramaphosa’s new cabinet