Absa is accepting applications for its updated Gen A graduate recruitment programme. The Gen A Grad Programme is Absa’s bid to get a skilled “workforce of the future”, focusing on science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM) fields, combined with leadership, the bank said. While STEM is the main focus of the programme, it will also bring in leadership and other human behavioural skills that are taught mainly in arts or humanities degrees, it said. “As a forward-thinking bank committed to bringing the continent’s possibilities to life, we are well-positioned to shape this generation of young leaders,” said Dr Thokozile Lewanika Mpupuni, group head of Leadership, Learning and Talent at Absa. “The graduate programme has been renamed the Gen A Grad Programme to reflect a new generation of young African achievers and thinkers. A generation that understands the power of technology but also knows that human smarts, collaboration and leadership are the key to unlocking this potential to bring Africa’s full possibilities to life.” Some of the benefits of being accepted into the programme include: A structured development journey in the first year of employment;
Permanent employment at Absa from day one, with a competitive package;
Vehicle and home finance at staff rates;
Reduced banking fees;
Exclusive access to WorkInProgress – Absa’s global innovation hub;
Bringing your solutions from the Human Quantum Computer to life;
A dedicated Young Talent Team to support you;
The opportunity to be a part of initiatives affecting real change in Africa;
A strong support network of alumni;
Access to a vast networking of opportunities in Africa. Entry criteria A postgraduate qualification (minimum NQF Level 8) obtained before January 2020 (with the exception of Computer Science, as these students do not need a postgraduate qualification);
Less than 24 months’ permanent work experience (this excludes temporary work during full-time studies);
You must be a citizen of the country you are applying, or have the necessary permits and documents to prove you’re eligible to work in that country (you will be required to upload these documents with your application). Programmes related to professional qualifications: SAICA – final year students studying towards BCom Accounting Hons, CTA, GDA or equivalent;
CIMA – students currently completing studies that will propel them to the managerial level at the end of the year they apply (2019). Absa said that applications for the programme will close on 30 June 2019. Bursaries Absa has also opened its bursary applications for 2019. “Each year we select a handful of the most promising students who we believe have what it takes to move our business forward,” the bank said. “Our Bursary Programme provides financial support to full-time students, enabling them to complete their education and potentially pursue a career with us upon qualifying.: Applicants must be South African citizens currently at an accredited university or planning to enter tertiary education in 2020. Undergraduate students must have achieved a minimum average of 70% in the 2019 academic year. Applicants should be studying to complete a Bachelor’s degree in one of the following disciplines: Computer Science;
Informatics, Information Technology;
Data Science;
Statistics;
Analytics;
Actuarial Sciences;
Financial Mathematics;
Engineering (industrial, financial, or process);
Other relevant Mathematical Sciences;
Design. You can find out more about the Gen A programme and bursary programmes here. Read: The best and worst banking rewards in South Africa: eBucks vs uCount vs Greenbacks vs Absa Rewards