The South African Reserve Bank and the South African Mint have launched a number of new circulation coins, celebrating South Africa’s 25 years of Constitutional democracy. Speaking at a launch event on Wednesday (5 June), SARB governor Lesetya Kganyago said that the new circulation coins aim to highlight a few of the rights that resonated the most with citizens that were surveyed in South Africa. “It is, in fact, the first time in the history of the SARB and the South African Mint that South Africans were consulted to this extent in developing coin themes and designs,” he said. “I am told that, during the engagement with young South Africans, ‘our constitutional rights’ came up several times, which made this the overarching theme that we decided to depict on the coins. These perspectives were brought to life by some of the country’s most talented young artists who not only poured passion into the project but also captured the essence of the theme.” Kganyago said that SARB has ensured the integrity of the banknotes and coins in circulation so that they remain a secure method of payment, a unit of account, and a store of wealth. “A banknote is but a piece of paper, and a coin is but a piece of metal,” he said. “Both derive their worth from the trust that the citizens of a country have in the country’s currency. The confidence that South Africans have in their banknotes and coins is based on trust that the banknotes and coins are authentic, and trust in the institution that issues.” You can find pictures of the new coin faces below. Children’s Rights  – R2 coin Artist: Neo Mahlangu
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker Right to Education – R2  coin Artist: Neo Mahlangu
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker Environmental Rights – R2 coin Artist: Maaike Bakker
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker Freedom of Movement and Residence – R2 coin Artist: Rasty Knayles
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker Freedom of Religion, Belief and Opinion – R2 Coin Artist: Peter Mammes
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker ‘Let us live and strive for freedom’ – R5 coin Artist: Lady Skollie
Reverse Typographer: Garth Walker Read: Rand takes a hit as shock GDP data shows biggest quarterly drop in a decade