The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has opened its bursary applications for 2019. As part of addressing the severe shortage of skills in South Africa, the central bank provides bursaries to students in relevant fields of study who are from disadvantaged backgrounds. “The purpose of the bursary scheme is to assist financially needy students who obtain good results in matric/Grade 12 and who want to study in fields relevant to the bank,” it said. “The bursary is intended for undergraduate studies at a South African university on a full-time basis.” The SARB said that the bursaries it offers will be dependent on the functions and activities of the bank. Some of these courses include: Economics;
Actuarial Sciences;
Mathematical Statistics;
Information Technology;
Finance;
Law;
Accounting. “A bursary will be granted from the first academic year and reviewed annually,” the SARB said. “Bursary holders need not reapply for the bursary each year. The total number of students and related bursary costs will be reviewed annually.” Criteria In addition to the above criteria, the following will be used as guidelines in the awarding of bursaries: Bursaries will be awarded to students who obtain 70% in the June matric/Grade 12 examinations with final awarding subject to final results and enrolment acceptance at a South African university
Bursaries will be awarded to South African citizens only.
Only students who would not have the means of attending university, had it not been for a bursary, would be considered. “The bank will have first right of refusal with regard to funded students, that is, bursary holders will be obliged to work for the bank after completion of their studies unless the bank chooses not to employ them,” it said. “Students who choose not to work for the bank, despite the bank offering them a position after completing their studies will be required to pay the full cost of the bursary back to the bank.” Most desirable employer The Reserve Bank was rated as one of South Africa’s most attractive employers in 2019 according to Universum’s rankings. Nearly 23,000 working professionals and over 45,000 students participated in the survey to share their opinions and views on career goals and ideal employers. The central bank was named as the most desirable employer among South African business students, and the sixth most desirable employer among South African business professionals. The below list shows the most desirable employers among business/commerce students and professionals. Read: Major shake-up proposed for South African schools – including new rules for failing students