SARS has started sending messages to some taxpayers showing a simulated tax calculation, allowing certain South Africans to skip the hassle of submitting a tax return. The revenue collector said it has access to many sources of information about taxpayers, including information already on the SARS system. “Based on this information, SARS can make a tax calculation and arrive at an outcome before you even lift a finger,” it said. “This outcome will show whether you would get a refund or owe SARS money if you were to file a return. “So the reason why you got a tax calculation this year is because you filed a return last year when you were not required to do so. We introduced this tax calculation as a way of assisting our taxpayers to avoid unnecessary visits to our branches during Tax Season.” SARS said that if your financial circumstances have not changed since February 2018 then you do not need to file a return. If your circumstances have changed you may still file a return however, the revenue collector encouraged taxpayers to use the eFiling channel or the SARS MobiApp to avoid the queues at its branches. No refunds under R100 In the same statement, SARS said it is only eligible to refund an amount greater than R100 in terms of current tax legislation. “Normally there are costs involved to pay out refunds as is the case when SARS needs to collect tax that is due,”it said. “It is therefore not cost effective to refund or collect an amount as low as R100. This however does not mean that the tax debt disappears, it will still remain due by or to the taxpayer and will be carried forward to either set-off future tax debt for the same tax type or will be added to any refund which is higher than R100 when applicable. “The amount of R100 refund is specified in section 191(3) of the Tax Administration Act, 2011 and reads as follows: “An amount is not refundable if the amount is less than R100 or any other amount that the Commissioner may determine by public notice, but the amount must be carried forward in the taxpayer account.” Read: 5 ways you can legally avoid paying more tax than you need to