Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Like it or not, the NHI is here to stay, says president Cyril Ramaphosa. The comments come a week after the NHI Bill was published for public scrutiny, where it has faced backlash from many sectors. Questions remain about funding, implementation and management of the scheme – as well as the role of medical aids. However, despite the backlash, Ramaphosa says it’s not going anywhere. [TimesLive] The legal battle between Peter Moyo and Old Mutual has turned nasty, with the former CEO seeking a court order declaring that Old Mutual is in contempt of court for not immediately reinstating him as ordered by the court. Old Mutual is appealing the judgement, and argues that it does not have to comply with the order, pending the outcome of the appeals process. [Moneyweb] Disgraced former Eskom boss Brian Molefe will have his assets attached by the sheriff of the court, following a ruling that found that he must pay back R10.3 million of his unlawful pension payout. Union Solidarity said that Molefe’s Pretoria home would be attached and then sold at public auction to pay off his debts. Meanwhile he will also have to pay costs for the court case, and faced further private prosecution. [TimesLive] Former president Jacob Zuma is fighting a desperate battle to avoid paying R16 million in court costs, for all his litigation over the years. He is petitioning the Supreme Court of Appeals to challenge a ruling that said he was not entitled to state funding for all his many legal battles to defend against corruption charges. He has accused the judges in the cases of political bias, and say the many cost orders against him are a violation of his constitutional rights. [Business Day] South Africa’s rand firmed on Tuesday, helped by improved risk appetite on signs of easing trade friction after the United States said it would delay tariffs on some Chinese products and both sides agreed to continue talks. On Wednesday, the rand was at R15.12 to the dollar, R18.23 to the pound and R16.89 to the euro.