The US Embassy to South Africa has opened 2020/2021 applications to its Hubert H. Humphrey Fellowship Program. The fellowship offers mid-career professionals an opportunity to spend up to one year in the United States participating in non-degree graduate-level study and leadership development seminars. The program also provides fellows time to consult with US faculty and industry experts, and participate in field trips, workshops, and research projects to assist in the development of practical useful strategies that can be applied to the fellows’ work in South Africa. Fellows are selected through a competitive process based on leadership and commitment to service in the public or private sector. Applicants with five years or more of full-time work experience and a completed four-year undergraduate degree are encouraged to apply. The fellowship provides for: Payment of tuition and fees at the assigned host university;
Pre-academic English language training, if required;
A living allowance, including a one-time settling-in allowance;
Accident and sickness coverage;
A book allowance and one-time computer subsidy;
Air travel (international travel to and from the US for the Program and domestic travel to required program events);
Professional Development allowance for professional activities, such as field trips, professional visits and conferences. South Africans Since 1982, 87 South Africans have participated in the fellowship program. Cape Town resident Jana le Roux, South Africa’s 2019 Humphrey Fellow, will be based at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. Le Roux is a qualified attorney working as a legal advisor in the public sector. “The Humphrey Fellowship will provide me with invaluable experience and leadership skills of working together with, and learning from, global leaders” she said. “I will be exposed to a variety of perspectives and knowledge which I will harness and apply for the betterment of the public service on my return to South Africa.” You can read more about the application process here. Read: R130 million VC fund to boost South Africa’s tech startups