Old Mutual says it has sent another notice of termination to Peter Moyo, as it awaits the outcome of the appeals process to a court order that reinstated him as chief executive officer (CEO). The listed financial services group has written an open letter to shareholders, addressing concerns raised by them in respect to an ongoing legal battle with Moyo, who was initially suspended by the Old Mutual board on 23 May after it concluded that there had been a material breakdown in trust and confidence. This followed prior engagements with Moyo over concerns about how a conflict of interest had been managed in relation to his investments in the NMT group of companies. Moyo said that he was suspended after a disagreement over how the company should engage with an investment firm he founded. He said that his suspension related to ‘how different parties thought Old Mutual should engage with NMT Capital, which he founded and in which an Old Mutual subsidiary is an investor. “That relationship has always been there from the day I started and it was properly disclosed,” he told Reuters by phone, emphasising the suspension was the result of differences on the approach to engagement rather than the relationship itself. “There is actually absolutely no wrongdoing on my part,” he said. In July, the Johannesburg High Court ruled that Old Mutual acted unlawfully when dismissing Moyo, while also blocking the business from continuing a process of finding a replacement. The court orded the company to reinstate him, and also ordered Old Mutual to pay Moyo’s legal costs. Old Mutual is appealing the ruling, and in the interim said it will not reappoint Moyo until the appeals process has concluded. Moyo was given notice of dismissal in June. The financial services firm said that Moyo was involved in approving NMT Capital ordinary dividend payments (in his capacity as a director of NMT Capital) at a time when various amounts were due and payable by NMT Capital to Old Mutual. This was in breach of the terms of NMT Capital’s preference share subscription agreement with Old Mutual, it said. “These ordinary dividend payments benefited Mr Moyo personally in the amount of approximately R30.6 million, and he did not at any relevant stage raise the matter with the board sub-committee entrusted with oversight over his relationship with NMT. “The board was not satisfied with Mr Moyo’s responses during his engagements with board sub-committees and with the Board itself when these matters were raised with him,” it said. The group told shareholders that the case that Moyo had won was not on the fairness of the reason for terminating his employment or the fairness of the procedure that was followed – but rather on the June notice of his dismissal. “A High Court judge decided in urgent proceedings that the company was not entitled to give the June notice of termination without, as a term of the contract, first holding a formal disciplinary process. “We respectfully disagree, both because we do not believe that the contract required this and because we believe that a fair and appropriate process was followed before notice was given,” the group said. Further notice Old Mutual said that events following the court ruling have overtaken the appeals process, where allegations and counter-allegations – not related to the dismissal at all – have distracted from the fact that any working relationship between the company and Moyo is untenable, irrespective of the outcome of the legal proceedings. “It is clearly in the best interests of the company and its stakeholders that the employment relationship with Mr Moyo should come to an end. For this reason, Old Mutual has now given Mr Moyo a further notice terminating his employment,” it said. The group noted that Moyo may challenge this process as well, but said it will stand its ground, while continuing to “respect the law and the court system”. It said that it is not the party that has initiated the litigation against Moyo, and is therefore not able to bring the court battle to an end of its own accord. “The group’s lawyers have proposed expedited arbitration of those aspects that are suitable for arbitration, and the company will continue to explore and consider all reasonable alternative options open to end the disputes with Mr Moyo. “But the board cannot discharge its fiduciary duties without opposing claims where this is in the interests of stakeholders and where the company is legally advised that it has good grounds for doing so.” Share Price Share in Old Mutual declined significantly after company first suspended Moyo in May, before recovering somewhat. However, the group’s share price took a further dive in July, when Moyo won his case and was ordered to be reinstated. In the past month the group’s stocks have lost 15% of their value, currently trading at R18.34. Old Mutual’s share price is down 18% in 2019, from the starting price of R22.40.  The full letter is below: Read: ‘Moyo is not permitted, nor required to report for work’: Old Mutual