We’re moving our Silver Lakes branch to bigger and better premises. The new premises is still located in the Silver Lakes area in Pretoria East, but will now be situated on the corner of Solomon Mahlangu Drive and Bendeman Boulevard. Access to the branch as well as the need for more space were the main reasons behind the big move. With the move of the Silver Lakes branch, all our Gauteng branches will also be open for business on Sundays. The decision to trade seven days a week will give customers more time to browse the cars on the floor. As with any of the WeBuyCars branches, customers will also be able to sell their cars at the new branch. The WeBuyCars Silver Lakes branch was our very first official branch – now it is one of eight branches. The other branches are located in Johannesburg South, Midstream, Port Elizabeth and two branches in both Durban and Cape Town respectively. The Midstream branch is also home to our corporate headquarters. Before our founders, Faan and Dirk van der Walt, bought the land it was to be built on, they operated from a small holding situated in Pretoria East. WeBuyCars was officially established back in 2001. The business started to show growth as Faan and Dirk got to know more about the market, the business of selling cars and what it takes to run a successful business. The original Silver Lakes branch was built in 2010 with capacity to house 100 cars – a daunting challenge at the time for the owners. A mere six months later, the land next door to the warehouse was bought to keep up with the ever-increasing storage demand. At this stage we needed space to house 700 cars. Because of our rapid growth in a very short time, the warehouse soon proved to be too small once again and we realised that expansion was imminent. After much deliberation and planning, it was decided to move the branch to its new location on Solomon Mahlangu Drive. The new location allows customers easy access from both the N4 highway as well as the surrounding neighbourhoods within Pretoria East. Trading at our new WeBuyCars Silver Lakes branch will officially start on Thursday 1 August. The new premises will include space for 800 cars. When buying a vehicle from any WeBuyCars branch, you will have the option to make use of our trusted finance and insurance service. WeBuyCars buying pods have also been erected in 17 locations across the country. The location of these pods can be seen on our website. Weekly car auctions take place at the Johannesburg South branch on Mondays, and twice a week at the Midstream branch on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Auction dates and times for our Silver lakes branch will be announced on our website soon. For more information on the new WeBuyCars Silver Lakes branch or how you can sell your car hassle free, phone the WeBuyCars contact centre on 087 057 0000 or visit webuycars.co.za. This article was published in partnership with WeBuyCars.