It’s Emerald Skyes for those looking to invest in the beautiful suburb of Greenstone, with our new Reeflords development opening its doors to both savvy investors and excited potential homeowners. As the newest stunning addition to our ever-expanding portfolio of upscale property developments, Emerald Skye is the first of our Property Developments to extend up to an impressive six stories – proving that, in Greenstone, the Skye really is the limit! Find out more about Reeflord’s ever-expanding portfolio of upscale property developments. Perfect for those thinking of making a lucrative long-term investment in property, Greenstone offers incredible opportunities to build your property portfolio. Located on the East Rand of Johannesburg, the area is comfortably nestled between the N3 highway and the R25 Modderfontein road, making it easily accessible for those working in Sandton’s CBD and close to Africa’s largest airport, OR Tambo International. Whether you (or your tenants) travel frequently for work, or just love being bitten by the travel bug, the unbeatable combination of Emerald Skye’s secure lock-up-and-go layout, coupled with its ease of access to the airport, make it an ideal home. With this location, it’s no surprise that young professionals are looking to Greenstone to live and thrive, and Emerald Skye is the perfect place to do just that. And with so many enviable internal facilities and gorgeous finishes, families are guaranteed to find their forever homes at Emerald Skye, too. Looking for an opulent, enviable lifestyle that also speaks to comfort and security? Then look no further.  Making your forever home at 38 Greenstone Place, Emerald Skye is conveniently situated opposite the Nissan dealership and the Greenstone Crescent Shopping Centre in the bustling community of Greenstone, however, the development’s closed off security allows for optimal privacy and serenity for residents. The Gautrain runs to the east and north of Greenstone, with Marlboro station located just a couple of minutes’ drive from Emerald Skye, making it an ideal home for those who work in the Sandton or Rosebank CBDs but are looking to keep their home life away from the overwhelming bustle of a central business district. Work in Sandton? Just five minutes after leaving Sandton station you could be stepping off the train at Marlboro, with Rosebank commuters just an eight-minute trip away from home. If you’re thinking of investing, this is the perfect place to gain a property that will undoubtedly be in demand with young professionals. We know that your own and your family’s safety and security is of key importance to you, which is why Emerald Skye is fitted out with 24-hour security. Each of the development’s 331 luxury residential apartments feels totally safe and secure, while simultaneously offering you total privacy and comfort. When it comes to living the best lifestyle, few developments can compete with the opulent comfort of Emerald Skye. Each apartment is equipped with state of the art finishes, fibre optic connections, and energy-saving heat pumps, with apartment buildings all equipped with elevators.  Plus, a shuttle service is also set up to run between parking bays and residences for your convenience, so you never have to worry about carrying luggage, groceries, prams, or even your kids large distances just to get home again! In the development itself, life has never been more beautiful. Your children will be able to grow and play in the most nurturing of settings, with a swimming pool, children’s play area and putt-putt area all contributing to their development. On top of this, we have included a tranquil park area, a state-of-the-art gym, and a cafeteria inside the development to take fine living to a whole new level. With 1, 2, and 3-bedroom apartments and penthouses available, there’s an Emerald Skye home for everybody. Are you ready to start really living? Emerald Skye is ready for you. This article was published in partnership with Reeflords.