The National Hijacking Prevention Academy (NHPA) has released updated information about hijacking in South Africa. According to the group, it has become increasingly difficult to steal locked motor vehicles due to new anti-theft technologies, which has led to a dramatic increase in vehicle hijackings. “The increasing retrenchment and the high unemployment figures are also factors,” the NHPA said. “This is easy-earned money and the already well-established syndicates will buy these vehicles from the hijacker.” “Vehicle hijacking is an organised business, run according to business principles and based on thorough planning. Specific vehicles with specific characteristics are ordered beforehand and efforts have to be made to meet the requirements of such orders.” These vehicles will then be resold to the already predetermined buyer, the NHPA said. Time and date The NHPA’s data shows that hijackings occur every day of the week, reaching a high on Fridays, due to motorists being more relaxed and traffic increasing earlier. Weekends show a lower hijacking rate due to syndicates checking their stock and placing orders on Mondays, as well as the fact that there are fewer vehicles on the road. This also explains why Tuesdays and Wednesdays show more hijackings.   The NHPA’s data shows that the hijacking of vehicles reached its lowest point at 02h00 in the morning. Hijackings are low during the night and early hours of the morning and start increasing at 06h00 due to motorists leaving home for work and stabilises throughout the day. Hotspots You can find a list of hijacking hotspots in Cape Town, Johannesburg, Durban and Pretoria below. Cape Town  Voortrekker road between Bellville and Parow;
The Corner of Military road and Prince George Drive;
St Stephens road;
Driving along Alice Street, especially near Voortrekker road;
Travelling along Station road;
Travelling along Klipfontein road;
The corner of Prestwich road and Ebenhezer;
Travelling along Vangaurd Drive;
Travelling on the R300 under the bridges towards the N1 highway. Johannesburg  The corner of Kelvin Street and CR Swart;
The corner of Pretoria road and CR Swart;
The corner of Elgin road and Pretoria road;
Linksfield road off-ramp off the N3;
Booysens road off-ramp off the M1;
The Nelson Mandela Bridge, be alert;
Wolmarans between Claim and Nugget;
The corner of Harrow and Saratoga;
The corner of Harrow and Abel;
The Houghton Drive off-ramp off the M1;
The corner of Jan Smuts Avenue and St Andrews;
The corner of 17th Street and Krause Street in Pageview;
The Heidelberg road off-ramp off the N17;
Traffic lights on Kyalami Drive;
The Beyers Naude offramp off the N1 highway;
Rivonia off-ramp off the N1 highway in Sunninghill;
Midrand Road near Clayville Residents;
The intersection of Grayston and Rivonia and the intersection of Grayston and 11th Street;
11th Avenue and Empire road off-ramps;
The Jan Smuts Avenue/ William Nicol Drive split in Hyde Park;
Intersections on Witkoppen road;
Bramley Precinct, areas such as Wynberg, Bramley, Marlboro and Kew;
Yeoville Precinct, areas such as Yeoville, Bellevue and Bellevue East;
The Norwood Precinct, areas such as Orange Grove and Highlands;
The Sandringham Precinct, areas such as Glenhazel, Lombardy East and Sandringham;
The Parkview Precinct, areas between 10th and 11th avenue and 4th and 7th Avenue in Parkhurst;
The Hillbrow Precinct, areas such as Upper Houghton and Killarney;
The Rosebank Precinct, areas such as Saxonwold and Parkwood;
The intersection between Christiaan de Wet and Wilgerood Road in Roodepoort;
Louis Botha Avenue, the M11. Be aware at the traffic lights, especially between Hillbrow and Alexandra;
Riviera off-ramp coming off the M1;
11th Avenue in Fairland, near Fairland Ex. 6;
The corner of Pretoria Main road and 1st Avenue in Alexandra;
New road off-ramp coming off the N1, be aware at the robots;
William Nichol off ramp coming off the N1 highway. Pretoria  Beyers Naude Drive and Paul Kruger Street;
The R55 in Erasmia;
Burnett Street, Delfi Avenue, Garsfontein road;
The traffic lights on Stormvoel;
The traffic lights on Watermeyer Street;
The traffic lights on Nelson Mandela Drive;
The crossing at Lynwood road and Simon Vermooten;
The crossing at Lynwood road and Hans Strijdom;
The traffic lights on Walker Street;
The traffic lights on Duncan Street;
The corner of University road and Lynwood road;
The Rigel Avenue off-ramp from off the N1;
The Simon Vermooten road crossing with Pretoria Street;
The Simon Vermooten road crossing with Farrow Street;
The Simon Vermooten road crossing with Lynwood road;
The Lynwood road onramp from the N1;
The Hans Strydom off-ramp off the N4 highway;
The intersection between Hans Strijdom and the R21;
The Atterbury off-ramp off the N1;
Crossings on Pretorius Street;
The crossing at Schoeman Street and Duncan;
The crossing at Schoeman Street and Hilda;
The crossing at Schoeman Street and Grosvenor. Durban  Alpine Road;
Crossings on West Street;
The corner of Warwick Avenue and Smith Street. Read: South Africa’s worst hijacking hotspots