Finbond Mutual Bank has launched an exciting new banking service, Finbond Platinum, aimed at the Afrikaans market. This new addition to the Finbond Mutual Bank stable, who has a growing transactional banking customer count of 200 000 plus, also serves customers in any other language, and anyone eligible to open a bank account, is welcome! Visit the Finbond Platinum website, to find out more now. Finbond Platinum is based in Somerset West, and aims to be a leading Afrikaans banking service in South Africa, offering sterling and unmatched personal Platinum style service at normal savings account prices. This is evidenced, for example, by their direct line access as opposed to a Switchboard/IVR environment, where you are assisted immediately by a friendly agent, as well as Whatsapp service assist for convenience. According to Finbond Platinum, it is changing the status quo, where large banks have mostly lost touch with the clients they serve; they aim to re-ignite personal service levels at high standards Customers are offered direct access to real people, on a first name basis, who offer private banking style services in their own language. Finbond firmly believes in improving the life of its clients and that a saving culture should be encouraged and rewarded, especially in our day and age of consumerism. Finbond Platinum offers subscribers excellent client service, in Afrikaans, and direct access to a personal banker 24-hours a day, for as little as R4.95 per month.  The bank also has secure online and mobile banking App, in Afrikaans or English, which makes financial transactions easy and convenient. Finbond pays 6% interest for normal savings accounts. While clients can move their full banking portfolio to Finbond Platinum, at great transactional rates, it can also be used as a secondary account which offers a great interest rate. People who sign up for a new Finbond Platinum account will receive their new bank card within 1 to 2 days at an address of their choice. To find out more, visit: Finbond Platinum, phone 086 00 00 471, or simply SMS the Word MYBANK to 30635 (Network dependant). Please note that terms and conditions apply.  This article was published in partnership with Finbond.