The Audi TT’s third generation is now available in South Africa with a facelift that includes a sporty and refined exterior design, higher-powered engines and an extended scope of standard equipment. Audi said it has refined the design of the new TT range, enhanced its performance and extended the range of standard equipment. Besides the driver-oriented Audi virtual cockpit with racing gauges, the basic version of the new model now features the Audi drive select dynamic handling system, Audi smartphone interface, parking aid plus, power-adjustable front seats and the multifunction steering wheel plus, with which the infotainment and voice control system can be controlled entirely using the steering wheel. Also standard are the illuminated USB ports as well as MMI navigation plus. “The exterior design of the new TT range is now more masculine, more progressive and even sportier than before. The front features a three-dimensional single-frame radiator grille and large side air inlets emphasise the vehicle’s width dimensions,” Audi said. At the rear, horizontal lines underscore the breadth of the new Audi TT. There is no cap underneath the tank flap with its classic TT design; the driver can insert the fuel pump nozzle directly into the opening. Headlights with LED technology is part of its standard equipment, however Matrix LED technology is optionally available. “The dynamic turn signals are usual visual highlights on this model as well,” the German carmaker said. It said that the new designed, optional S line exterior package underscores the athletic character of the Audi TT range even more. It includes a full-length front splitter, vertical air inlets, a radiator grille in titanium black and specific side sills with inserts as well as a sporty rear end. Added is a wider diffuser and vertical air inlets below the rear lights with three horizontal fins each. The Audi TT and TTS Coupé is 4.19 metres in length with short overhangs and the wheelbase measures 2.51 metres. The face-lifted TT range includes 19-inch wheels in five different designs. Three new body colours complete the range of paint finishes: cosmos blue, pulse orange and turbo blue (S line models only). High-powered engines Audi South Africa will offer two petrol engine derivatives as part of the local Audi TT range. The Audi TT Coupé 45 TFSI S tronic includes 169 kW of power and the Audi TTS Coupé quattro S tronic produces 228 kW of power. The 45 TFSI is paired with a seven-speed dual-clutch transmission, while the TTS is mated to a six-speed S tronic transmission. The close-ratio lower gears enable powerful acceleration, while the wide ratio of each transmission’s highest gear keeps the engine speed down. If the customer chooses the S line sport package or Audi magnetic ride, the body is lowered by ten millimetres. Other chassis highlights include progressive steering, four-link rear suspension and Electronic Stabilisation Control (ESC). The wheel-selective torque control is activated in fast cornering and improves handling as required by means of precise brake interventions on the unloaded wheels on the inside of a curve. The sports car character is also underscored by the driver-oriented interior with its clear lines. The slender instrument panel resembles an aircraft wing; the round air vents with integrated controls allude to jet engines – a classic TT detail, Audi said. Sport seats with integrated head restraints are standard on the Audi TT range. The Audi TT Coupé 45 TFSI S tronic is priced at R670,000 and the Audi TTS Coupé quattro S tronic is priced at R782,000. Both models come standard with the 5 year / 100 000km Audi Freeway plan and inclusive of all taxes.     Read: A look at the new Ford Mustang – with prices