Retailer Edgars has opened a new concept store in Fourways Mall, Johannesburg, in an attempt to ‘keep with the times’, and amid a stagnant economy in South Africa. Edgars re-launched its brand in 2018, as its parent company, Edcon struggles to stay afloat, juggling a huge debt load, and waning market share in the retail industry. The company opened up a new ‘home’ store, while it has offloaded Edgars Active chain stores. “Internationally, retailers are purposefully rewiring themselves in the ever evolving retail landscape to enable the ‘experience economy’. Retail isn’t dead, only boring retail is dead. To thrive in a time where customers can do anything anywhere and get personalised real-time experiences both online and in real life, big retailers need to make the shift,” Edgars said. “Blurring the line between shop and mall walkway, the Edgars Fourways Mall shop front opens up completely, inviting people to move into the store and participate in the Edgars experience – nothing less than an 8,000 sqm space of fashion, beauty, and homeware. The new space includes a Mugg & Bean coffee shop in the central square – which “heightens the concept of creating entertainment through shopping and socialising,” it said. The new store, Edgars added, will compliment its newly launched click and collect service. “Shoppers can now shop online (or on their mobile devices), choose a store for delivery, and collect their order at no additional cost – This online service is now available at the new Edgars, Fourways Mall.” Other special in-store features and services include the denim bar, home zone, footwear world, custom zone, personal shoppers, and beauty rooms. “Activation spaces for cosmetic events, home demonstrations, and new launches bring in an experiential element to the store. There are play areas for kids and digital multi zone screens with in-store music,” Edgars said. Non-transactional spaces that focus on customer service have been designed with a hospitality-led approach. “For example, instead of a typical counter service, the customer/financial service zones are far more welcoming and friendly with their service booths, soft seating, and informal pause areas.” The brand is currently working on a further evolution of the new Edgars store design for Edgars V&A in Cape Town, which is anticipated to open in 2020.  Till points and customer service  Mugg & Bean inside Edgars  Read: Footgear acquires Edgars Active chain stores