It has become a major trend to buy an older home for renovation or restoration purposes. However, some homes can be a nightmare to repair and to renovate despite being reasonably priced and being perceived as ‘offering good value for money’. This is according to Trevor Sturgess, Seeff’s MD in Kibler Park, who said that buyers should watch out for tell-tale signs when it comes to older property that will either assist in picking up a good deal or biting off more than they can chew. Below he outlined the issues that potential property owners should investigate, before buying an older home. It is extremely important to look for signs of leaks as older homes often have old water pipes that have rusted over the years. These pipes will eventually burst because of the water pressure and a plumber would need to replace all the pipes. This can be both pricey and time consuming; Watch out for leaks from the ground where puddles of water will gather and from the roof where water marks from the ceiling may be visible. Always pertinently ask the agent or seller about water leaks and plumbing issues while viewing the property as these may not always be patent defect; Look at the wooden rafters outside the home as it will give a general idea of how the home has been maintained over the years. If wooden rafters are stained or creosoted, measures were obviously taken to preserve them. If they are starting to rot however it could mean that you would need to redo the entire roof of the home; Look at the plaster work on walls – as nasty cracks may have been covered up with Polyfila. If cracks aren’t dealt with in the correct manner they will always return. Follow cracks to see where they go even if means that you have to climb into the ceiling. Also make a point of asking about cracks and any other issues that may be latent; Check if all light switches and plugs are working. Even though it is the law that a home must come with an Electrical Certificate of Compliance (COC), you will be well advised to check basic things like the oven and stove to see if they switch on and heat up; If there are carpets ask what is underneath – concrete, tiles or wood flooring? “Sellers will often undertake to fix up problems that buyers have identified and these should be duly stated in the Offer to Purchase,” said Sturgess. “Rather spend enough time investigating the home before you put in an offer as such a huge investment certainly warrants due diligence.” Read: One of the rarest pieces of land in South Africa is up for auction