In celebration of Women’s Month, women law enforcement officers will undertake massive law enforcement operations throughout the country. With a day left to South Africa commemorating Women’s Day, the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) said the integrated roadblocks involving officers from different authorities have been planned on all routes with a high number of fatal crashes. The drive forms part of efforts to reduce fatalities as the long weekend kicks off tomorrow. “Statistics show that deaths on South African roads increase substantially over the long weekends, with more people dying on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. The abuse of alcohol has been identified as one of the key factors contributing to crashes and this will form a major focus of law enforcement efforts over the long weekend,” it said. The RTMC said road crashes exert a heavy burden on the economy, society and families as they involve economically active members of society, many of whom are breadwinners and heads of families. A study conducted by the corporation as well as the Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has estimated that the cost of crashes to South Africa last year was R166.2 billion. It is estimated that one death on the road represents an average loss of R4.6 million to the economy in terms of lost productivity, pain and suffering, medical costs, legal and funeral costs. An analysis of statistics has identified the roads with the highest number of fatalities. The analysis has confirmed that the top 10 roads and areas with the highest number of deaths nationally are: R71 Mankweng in Limpopo;
R573 Umhlanga in Mpumalanga;
N4 Nelspruit in Mpumalanga;
N2 Libode in Eastern Cape;
N1 Naboomspruit in Limpopo;
N2 Umkhomazi in KwaZulu Natal;
N2 Pongola in KwaZulu Natal;
N2 Idutywa in Eastern Cape;
R37 in Mecklenburg;
N3 Harrismith in the Free State. A total of 254 people died on these roads last year and the human behaviour accounts for nine out of 10 fatal crashes that occurred on these roads. “These roads have been prioritised for intensified law enforcement and female-led operations will be conducted throughout the month to make these roads safer. “A massive road safety education and awareness campaign targeting pedestrians and passengers, will also be undertaken in support of women in law enforcement,” the RTMC said. Read: New upgrades coming to South Africa’s busiest highways