Huawei brand Honor has entered the South African mobile device market, targeting millennials through “innovative technologies for the fraction of the price of its competitors”. With the mobile communications segment in a constant state of competition and change, many brands are offering consumers premium products that most South African consumers simply cannot afford, it said. South Africans have only been exposed to the brand for a little over a year. The Honor brand forms part of the Huawei company, which enables it to leverage off the technological advancements of its parent company. “From the outset, Honor was a brand that was envisioned as young, energetic and internet-centric, aiming to create a better and accessible mobile internet experience for the younger generation,” said Raymond Liu, CEO Honor South Africa. “Honor adopts a business strategy with a primary focus on millennials. Our rapid business growth in each market is thanks to our quality product, continuous innovation and user engagement.” Earlier this year, the company introduced South Africans to its flagship Honor 10 Lite device. Liu said that the company aims is to create exceptional experiences for its customers around the world. Seventy-five percent of Honor employees are aged from 21 to 34, further entrenching the company as a brand focused on the youth. “Honor’s product development team offers exclusive functionalities based on the needs of today’s technology-savvy consumers,” said Liu. “Huawei and Honor focus on different consumer segments and offer a different product portfolio with a varied operating model,” Liu stressed. “While Huawei has its different brand strategy targeted at business elites and focused more on premium segments, Honor’s primary focus is on developing products to suit the more youthful mid-range market.” “We as the Honor brand regard the South African market as a key pillar to building on our global success, and we envisage that once South African consumers see what Honor devices can do to enhance for their lives, we will most definitely be a force to be reckoned with in this competitive market,” Liu said. Honor devices are available through Vodacom, Cell C, The Foschini Group, Game, Edgars, and Cellucity stores nationwide, with packages starting from R169pm for 24 months, or cash price starting from R1,999 once off. Read: Huawei smartphone growth up 24%