Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Gauteng Health MEC Bandile Masuku says there is a false perception that private healthcare is of better quality in South Africa – adding that private hospitals only provide a better ‘bed and breakfast’ experience. The MEC said that private healthcare institutions only serve 8% of the population, are over-servicing, but under-utilising bed space. The NHI wants to correct this, and bring quality healthcare to all South Africans. [News24] Eskom is being forced to pay 20% more to procure coal, counter to the company’s goal to rein in costs. Every time the company puts out a new tender for new coal procurement, however, this drives up demand, which in turn drives up prices. Analysts say the only way to procure coal without driving up prices it negotiate with individual mines, one at a time. The group’s current method will always result in higher prices. [IOL] Deputy State Security Minister Zizi Kodwa says the public protector is being used to fight factional battles within the ANC, with a well calculated and systematic approach to undermine President Ramaphosa. He said it is concerning that she finds herself within the political space, with reports targeting some, while ignoring others – such as the politicians involved in the Estina dairy project, who got nary a mention in any of her reports on the matter. [ENCA] Dozens more murders are being reported in Cape Town, though numbers are declining slightly. Over the weekend, 34 more people will killed in the city, despite the presence of the national defence force. This is down from 47 the week prior, and over 40 the weekend before that. The SANDF was called in to curb the violent attacks that have seen over 2,300 people murdered in the city’s worst areas since the start of the year. South Africa’s rand weakened on Monday as traders and investors continued to weigh heightened global growth risks against local uncertainty, while equities rose in line with global stock markets. On Tuesday the rand was at R15.42 to the dollar, R18.71 to the pound and R17.10 to the euro.