Yesterday, Deloitte released its milestone 10th annual report on technology trends, “Tech Trends 2019: Beyond the digital frontier” report which examines a decade of technological change, identifying key trends that will reshape business and government in the next 18-24 months. The report launch, held at the Equinox Leadership and Innovation Centre in Sandton, convened South Africa’s business and technology leaders to discuss the latest technology trends impacting business, and how the local market can capitalise on them for the best outcomes. The launch event included a keynote address by world-renowned EMEA Technology Research & Insights Leader, Hans van Grieken who shared a 360-degree view of Deloitte’s 10th annual Tech Trends report followed by a robust panel discussion that further unpacked the top three technology trends at the centre of disrupting South African businesses. The panel of experts included: Deloitte Consulting Africa CIO Programme Leader; Kevin Govender
Associate Director (Deloitte); Ica Van Eeden
Associate Director (Deloitte); Quentin Williams
Rekindle Learning Founder & Tech entrepreneur; Rapelang Rabana
Chair of Digital Business at Wits Business School; Dr Brian Armstrong “Ten years ago, when smartphones and mobile apps were gaining traction, and technologies like cloud and the Internet of Things were emerging on the scene, Deloitte released its first Tech Trends report”, says Deloitte Consulting Africa CIO Programme Leader Kevin Govender.  “Since then, we have watched this evolution unfold as the digital imperative and the changing role of technology redefine the enterprise, yet adoption of these trends continues to vary widely. The adoption of the disruptive technologies varies across the different industry sectors, where some companies prefer to be trailblazers and others late adopters.” The report begins with a reflection on a decade of disruptive change driven by eight macro forces. It further explores where these forces are headed and how the convergence of new technologies with powerful technological forces are driving disruption across industries. The final chapter of the report explores how modern businesses can navigate digital transformation — building a roadmap that incorporates the right technologies, techniques, talent and executive support. Key trends identified in the report as giving rise to new operating models – redefining the nature of work – dramatically changing IT’s relationship with the business are: AI-fueled organisations – Leading companies are systematically deploying rapidly maturing technologies – machine learning, natural language processing, RPA, and cognitive – not just to every core business process, but into products, services and the future of industries.
NoOps in a serverless world – We have reached the next stage in the evolution of cloud computing, with technical resources completely abstracted and management tasks increasingly automated allowing IT talent to focus on activities that more directly support business outcomes.
Connectivity of tomorrow – At both macro and micro levels, technologies like 5G, mesh networks, and edge computing are expanding business’ reach with utmost precision. Advanced networking is the unsung hero driving development of new products and services and is transforming how work gets done.
Intelligent interfaces – Today, people interact with technology through ever more intelligent interfaces that combine the latest in human-centered design techniques with leading-edge technologies such as computer vision, conversational voice, auditory analytics, augmented reality and virtual reality.
Beyond Marketing — Experience reimagined – To deliver the highly personalised, contextualised experiences that today’s customers expect. Enabled by a new generation of marketing tools and techniques focused on personalised, contextual and dynamic experiences, CIOs and CMOs can illuminate and engage customer needs and desires most effectively.
DevSecOps and the cyber imperative – DevSecOps fundamentally transforms cyber, security, privacy and risk management from being compliance-based activities into essential framing mindsets across the product journey. “While we take a pragmatic view, we also aspire to understand fully how these trends are reshaping and influencing industries,” says Govender. “The report details how organisational leadership can shape ambitions and instill a culture to make sense of what tomorrow may bring and importantly carve a path to get there from the realities of today.” This article was published in partnership with Deloitte.