Growthpoint Properties has secured JSE-listed technology group Altron as tenant for a 29,000 square metre head office situated at The Woodlands Office park, in Woodmead, Sandton. Altron will take up occupancy at The Woodlands in November 2020 with the group’s nine operating companies under one roof. The space is currently occupied by Deloitte which will leave the park at the end of March 2020 to make way for Altron. Deloitte will move to its new 42,500 square metre Midrand headquarters, in Waterfall Estate in the first quarter of 2020. Growthpoint said it will invest a significant amount to modernise, customise and connect eight buildings to Altron’s requirements. “Our intention is to have a workplace that caters for our needs as the employer in creating an environment that promotes employee excellence through collaboration, creative thinking, visibility of leadership and the free flow of communication. We also want our workplace to meet the needs of our employees who don’t only want a modern workplace but appreciate additional lifestyle services such as on-site gym facilities, creche, concierge services and the like,” said Mteto Nyati, Altron Group chief executive. Altron will occupy roughly a quarter of the 125,000sqm office park, which offers a lifestyle centre incorporating a gym, Mugg & Bean and creche. The Woodlands is unique in that its tranquil setting includes its very own game park which is home to Springbok, Blesbok and other smaller animals. A key feature of the Altron project is constructing a new walkway to create a spine linking all the buildings together. Growthpoint will also deliver a turnkey internal fit-out solution, beginning with a workplace study, to ensure the space is tailored for Altrons’s people and optimised for high performance. The upgraded campus is designed to receive a 4 Green Star SA rating from the Green Building Council of South Africa (GBCSA) – an independent certification of the campus’ resource- and cost-efficiency. Altron will relocate to its new premises in three phases; November 2020, March 2021 and April 2021. Read: Discovery’s insane rent at its R3 billion Sandton headquarters