The Department of Basic Education has announced that it will be scrapping Multiple Examination Opportunities (MEOs) from 2020. Originally introduced in 2017, the system allowed struggling matric students to complete their examinations over two years. A number of criteria needed to be met before students are allowed to qualify for the “Multiple Examination Option” (MEO) including: The learner writing the exam must be a progressed learner;
Have completed all his/her SBA requirements in all seven subjects;
Have attended school regularly (not absent for more than 20 days without a valid reason);
Have written the Preparatory examination (prelims) in all subjects;
Have failed a minimum of three subjects;
The learner selecting the Multiple Examination Option must write a minimum of three subjects in his first year (excluding LO) and must have written all seven subjects by the second year. Under the revised system, there will now be one end-of-year exam for all matriculants irrespective of their performance during the year. “We had to acknowledge that while well-intentioned, the Multiple Examination Opportunity is being used by some schools as a gatekeeping mechanism and not for its original intentions,” said Basic Education minister, Angie Motshekga. “Instead of assisting vulnerable learners to attain a matric certificate, it was allowing schools to cull learners through this process and not adequately supporting them through the multiple examination opportunities. “For this reason, we took the bold decision to protect learners and do away with the MEO from 2020,” she said. Other changes Motshekga also announced that her department is developing a coding and robotics curricula to be included from grades R-9. She said that curricula will provide learners with an understanding of coding and robotics and will develop their skills and competencies to prepare them for the fourth Industrial Revolution. “The curricula will ensure that our schooling system produces learners with the foundations for future work, and equip them with skills for the changing world,” Motshekga said. “The curricula will provide learners with an understanding of coding and robotics and will develop their skills and competencies to prepare them for the 4th Industrial Revolution. “The curricula will ensure that our schooling system produces learners with the foundations for future work, and equip them with skills for the changing world,”she said. Read: South African schools will soon get these 3 new subjects