Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its latest index, covering February 2019, showing which jobs skills are most in-demand in South Africa right now. According to the CJI, the seasonally adjusted index settled at 98 index points, indicating a slight uptake in job seeker activity while skills demand remained stable. “Year-on-year, jobs remain notably lower in the medical, engineering, construction and business & management sectors,” it said. “The marketing, sales, admin, office & support and manufacturing sectors on the other hand shows positive growth so far for 2019.” Trending jobs for February include roles in accounts payable and receivable, database design, development and administration and client/customer support. Accounts Payable / Receivable Average salary offerings for intermediate level position: GP: R 16,372 to R 19,712 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R 14,425 to R 17,583 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: R 13,265 to R 15,438 p.m. (CTC) Database Design / Development / Administration Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R 34,433 to R 42,257 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R 34,567 to R 44,137 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Client / Customer Support Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R 17,908 to R 25,490 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R 12,438 to R 15,500 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Most in-demand skills CareerJunction’s data showed that software developers, managers and financial accountants remain the m ost sought-after skills in the country. January and February saw a visible uptake in jobs for software developers, it said. Demand strengthened by over 25% during February 2019. “Consequently, software development remains the most sought-after skill set in the online job market,” CareerJunction said. With management, the jobs portal said that great employment prospects are evident within the field of department management, particularly for finance managers. “During February 2019, nearly half of all management-related vacancies were allocated to financial managers.” Finally, job advertising for financial/project accountants grew by 27% during February 2019, it said. “As a result, job seekers within this field are currently experiencing great employment prospects.” Supply and demand An uptake in jobs is evident in the marketing, sales, admin, office & support and manufacturing sectors since
the onset of 2019. This follows a steady downward trend during the final quarter of last year. Despite volatile skills demand in the financial, ICT and medical sectors, medical jobs remain considerably lower year-on-year, CareerJunction said. However, demand shows positive growth since the end of last year across all of these sectors. Year-on-year, job volumes remain notably lower in the engineering and construction sectors as well as the business & management sector. “This comes after a dip in jobs during the final quarter of last year,” the group said. “An uptake in jobs is evident in the marketing, sales, admin, office & support and manufacturing sectors since the onset of 2019. This follows a steady downward trend during the final quarter of last year,” it said. Read: Ramaphosa’s salary vs other world leaders