Robert Walters recruitment had released its annual salary survey, showing professional salaries across South Africa will increase by 7% on average in 2019. However, top performing professionals with highly sought-after skill sets can expect to see rises of 10-15%. “It will be another challenging year for the South African economy in 2019, as the pending election will bring about some level of uncertainty leading foreign firms to take a cautious approach to investing in the country,” said Nic Sephton-Poultney, Robert Walters South Africa MD. “We expect that organisations will take a careful approach to growth and hiring strategies. Professionals with a combination of strong technical skills and industry experience will remain sought after in the private sector.” Sephton-Poultney said that top performers will continue to be looked after and can expect a salary increase ranging between 10-15%; other professionals can expect inflationary increases of around 7%.” “With competition for professionals extremely high, securing top talent will require employers to operate swift hiring processes, as well as offering clearly defined career paths and opportunities to satisfy the needs of employees seeking both reassurance and variety.” Premiums paid for specialist finance professionals Demand for top previously disadvantaged talent resulted in salary increases of 15-20% in 2018, said Sephton-Poultney “Specialists with high levels of technical financial competency, industry knowledge and expertise in data, AI and BI were also able to command premiums,” he said. “With the finance charter, BBBEE legislation changes and general lack of top EE finance talent and successful EE candidates are being remunerated accordingly and this has increased top end salaries in this category.” “Regulatory demands that came with IFRS meant that demand was high for strong technical accountants but this was met with an acute candidate shortage.” Salary increases The tables below show expected salaries in the banking, finance and legal sectors, based on the salary survey conducted by Robert Walters. Qualified CA (SA) or CIMA Part-qualified CA (SA) or CIMA Taxation/Treasury Investment banking and financial services Accounting/Audit/Tax/Treasury Legal – in-house for commerce and industry Legal – in-house for financial services Legal – private practice Read: Laws to name and shame qualification fraudsters a step closer