Huawei has revealed its new range of P30 flagship smartphones at a launch event in Paris. The company revealed the P30 and P30 Pro smartphones at the event, which both include a selection of powerful features. Huawei’s P30 and P30 Pro offer great new camera functionality in addition to an overhauled design which minimises the presence of the front camera notch while expanding the edges of the OLED display. Major changes include the addition of in-screen optical fingerprint sensors on both the P30 and P30 Pro, with the P30 Pro also getting support for wireless charging. Huawei’s P30 Pro also supports 40W fast wireless charging in addition to wireless quick charge and reverse wireless charging functionality. The displays on the P30 and P30 Pro are almost completely bezel-less, with Huawei minimising the top and bottom bezels and removing the front speaker in favour of a sound-on display solution which vibrates the smartphone’s screen to produce audio. Both smartphones are dual-SIM devices and support a NanoSD memory card in their second SIM slots for expandable storage. At the time of writing, South African pricing listed online for the devices was: Huawei P30 – R11,499
Huawei P30 Pro – R16,499 P30 Lite Huawei also unveiled its P30 Lite device. The P30 Lite is the next iteration of the popular mid-range P Lite series. This device is especially popular in South Africa, with the P20 Lite dominating its pricing sector in the local market since launch. The new smartphone will offer a 32MP selfie camera and ultra-wide triple-camera system at a very attractive price point. The P30 Lite also packs a Kirin 710 processor with 4GB of RAM and 128GB of internal storage, and features an IPS LCD display instead of the OLED panels included on the high-end P30 and P30 Pro. Huawei has also opted to include a capacitive fingerprint sensor on the back of the P30 Lite smartphone instead of an in-screen fingerprint sensor like the one on the premium models. The device still sports a similar physical design to the flagship models however, along with various flagship features: such as a bezel-less display and tiny notch at the top of the screen. Like its premium counterparts, the P30 Lite includes a triple-camera system equipped with 24MP, 8MP, and 2MP lenses. At the time of writing, local pricing for the P30 Lite listed online was R5,699. Read: These are the best-selling smartphones in South Africa