Interviewing for your next job will require you to prepare and go in with your eyes open. This is according to jobs website Glassdoor which says that there are five qualities and characteristics that recruiters and career experts are constantly on the lookout for. Below it outlined these qualities and explained how to best present them during a job interview. Communication of motivations and preferences Recruiters are on the hunt for quality candidates that are a fit with their culture. “In this job market, it pays to be forthcoming about your motivations, expectations and work-life preferences such as how far you’re willing to commute or being interested in flexible work options,” Glassdoor said. So don’t be surprised if hiring managers or recruiters ask questions like “Why are you looking for a new career opportunity?” and “How far will you commute? Do you prefer urban, suburban, or rural?” Confidence in skill and experience Hiring managers are eager to extract a candidate’s knowledge, experience, skills and abilities to follow a common thread that weaves through all of your work experience. Therefore, you can present a strong hiring case by being able to describe the details about your biggest career accomplishments and contributions, Glassdoor said. “Preparing anecdotes and succinct examples of your impact will leave a positive impression on anyone who you may interview with. “You should be able to illustrate, through specific examples, your ability to make the department or organization better than when they arrived. “Did you streamline a process or reduce cost? Did you lead a team to quantifiable success? “Share specific details on projects assigned, obstacles faced, etc., including the actions you took and the end result.” Preparation for proceeding further in the process According to Glassdoor research, the average length of job interview processes is 23.8 days. However, some industries are able to screen candidates quickly, while others rely on more lengthy and intense interview processes. Therefore, recruiters are looking for candidates who are prepared to efficiently move through the hiring and interview process, it said. “Having a current overview of meaningful references is advised in order to keep the process chugging along. “In today’s digital world, and with ongoing work-life mobility, having current email addresses – even LinkedIn URLs and other modes of connecting with references – is advisable. “Also, be prepared to discuss salary expectations at any time. Using a tool like Know Your Worth, will allow you to remain informed and ready to negotiate at a moment’s notice.” Be honest and reflective about professional failures or shortcomings to show how you’ve grown A common interview question for hiring managers to ask in advanced stages of the process is “What was your biggest failure?” Successfully tackling this question and those like it shows that you are able to reflect honestly about where you struggle professionally. “To answer, be honest with yourself about your professional areas of challenge. Self-awareness is a soft skill, and these skills are increasingly in demand in the workplace,” said Glassdoor. “Next, share with the interviewer how you’ve addressed the weakness or failure. Mention the steps you’ve taken. Identifying and addressing an area of challenge demonstrates growth and maturity.” Be transparent about what it will take to poach you If a recruiter is trying to tempt you with an opportunity, it’s important to communicate with the company in a respectful, professional way. “Be straightforward about what it would take to lure you away from your current job: a higher salary, access to an onsite gym, access to education and training, flexible work schedule,” Glassdoor said. “Regardless of the offer and whether you are interested in being poached or not, positive communication is critical for maintaining a strong reputation.” Read: 3 interview questions job seekers struggle with the most 