Economist Mike Schussler has published a new graph showing the number of South Africans that are emigrating to New Zealand. According to Schussler, the number of South Africans migrating to New Zealand increased fivefold from January 2014 to January 2019. He added that the people leaving are typically skilled or have enough money to start a business – which means that South Africa loses out on valuable resources. Peaking at 1,085 South Africans leaving in January 2019, the graph shows that around 868 people left for New Zealand in August.  The latest data from Stats NZ shows that there has been a sharp rise in South African migrants, with 8,200 people moving to the country between April 2018 and April 2019. StatsNZ classifies migrants as overseas residents who arrive in New Zealand and cumulatively spend 12 of the next 16 months in the country. The duration of stay is based on observed travel histories from linked arrival and departure records. This means that approximately South Africans 683 migrated to New Zealand every month over the last year – or just over 22 people each day. South Africans choose to move to New Zealand for numerous reasons, most notably because it’s safe, is child-friendly, and has many job opportunities. Historically these South Africans have entered the country on residence and work visas; however, the data shows that there has also been an increase in student visa-arrivals in recent years. Reasons for leaving South Africans choose to move to New Zealand for numerous reasons, most notably because its safe, is child-friendly, and for job opportunities. Historically these South Africans have entered the country on residence and work visas, however, the data shows that there has also been an increase in student visa-arrivals in recent years. A May 2018 report by American think tank, Pew Research, estimated that there are currently 60,000 South African migrants living in New Zealand at the end of 2017 – the fourth highest migrant population outside of South Africa. According to Pew Research, New Zealand is only surpassed by the United Kingdom (210,000), Australia (190,000),  and the United States (100,000). Read: More than 30 jobs that South Africans can soon use to move to the UK 