EFTsecure is the most advanced EFT payment solution in South Africa, and has again proved this by becoming the first EFT solution to add Tyme Bank, Bidvest Bank, Old Mutual Money, and African Bank to its list of checkout options. “By adding Tyme Bank, Bidvest Bank, Old Mutual Money Account, and African Bank, we believe another segment of the market will now be able to utilise eCommerce and online shopping,” said Head of Partnerships for Callpay, Thomas van der Spuy. Contact Callpay to learn more about the extensive features of EFTsecure “EFTsecure opens the online shopping market to millions of South Africans as all banking cards aren’t eCommerce enabled.” He added that this will allow consumers to shop online using a secure checkout page. “Completing a payment takes seconds, with an easy step-by-step process,” said van der Spuy. CTO of CallPay Devonne Burger said that EFTsecure offers vastly superior security features when compared to its competition. EFTsecure offers merchants protection against common EFT payment risks such as fraud and chargebacks. This also allows merchants to offer customers prompt payment notifications, and to process refunds timeously. Burger added that EFTsecure has been breaking ground in terms of EFT payment security in South Africa. “Callpay became the first PSP globally to achieve Level 1 PCI-DSS v3 compliance and the first PSP in Africa to achieve Level 1 Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards v3.1 compliant Service Provider status,” said Burger. The solution is regularly and rigorously evaluated and audited by a variety of non-partisan entities, and because it forms part of Callpay’s omni-payment channel, it carries the same impressive level of security that Callpay is known for. Merchants who already use EFTsecure simply need to activate these four banks from within their account if they want to add these banks to their payment options. To learn more about how EFTsecure can solve your business’ instant EFT payment requirements, contact CallPay on info@callpayment.com or 087 550 6850.  This article was published in partnership with CallPay.