Today’s households are dealing with an increasing number of connected devices and a rising demand for greater bandwidth from streaming video, audio and online gaming. Wi-Fi 6 will boost your total network capacity and reliability, presenting you with new opportunities for speed, performance and capacity for wireless connectivity in your smart home. Click here to boost your total network capacity and reliability with a Wi-Fi 6 router. Smart Home devices and IOT applications in the average home are growing from an average of 10 devices, to as many as 50 or more. Many homes have smart home devices such as IP cameras, wearables, voice assistants, lightbulb, smart switches and appliances, which all need a constant connection to the network. With the introduction of Wi-Fi 6, the future of connectivity looks a whole lot brighter. Wi-Fi 6 has been designed to be able to handle an increase in devices without negatively impacting your Wi-Fi speeds. This results in a smooth streaming experience, while providing uninterrupted connectivity for any IOT device you may add to your smart home. Ultimately, as you connect more devices in your home, like upcoming PCs with Intel Wi-Fi 6 (Gig+), you can be confident that your network performance can keep up. With up to twelve Wi-Fi streams, increased bandwidth, Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple-Access (OFDMA) and faster encoding via multi-user, multiple input, multiple output (MU-MIMO), Wi-Fi 6 delivers far greater speeds more effectively because your smart devices have more paths to communicate with your Wi-Fi router. In fact, Wi-Fi 6 enabled smart devices will enjoy a 40% increase in speed over their Wi-Fi 5 counterparts. To stream 4K or 8K resolution video, you need a consistent high-speed connection. In households with multiple users, streaming high-definition video puts an even greater load on the network. With a combination of ultra-fast processors, increased memory and the increased number of radio streams, Wi-Fi 6 routers are up to the task of streaming multiple high definition video sessions without stuttering, buffering or other annoying hiccups you will see with older Wi-Fi technology. Wi-Fi 6 products are already here, so if you’ve bought the latest Samsung Galaxy smartphone (which is the first in the upcoming family of Wi-Fi 6 smartphones with other tablets and laptops to follow), you’ll benefit from the faster Wi-Fi speeds that the new Wi-Fi 6 routers offer. You’ll also be happy to hear that Wi-Fi 6 is backward compatible with previous Wi-Fi standards. To make the most of the higher speeds and greater bandwidth for the broad range of household network needs, Netgear has released a new family of routers and new Orbi system. Their range features the industry’s latest Wi-Fi 6 standard with four times increased data capacity to handle today and tomorrow’s growing home network. The new Nighthawk Wi-Fi 6 routers and Orbi Wi-Fi 6 system will make sure that you’re prepared for this major technology shift. Wi-Fi 6 routers will deliver faster connectivity and greater capacity to handle the many devices for your smart home. With the improved speed and bandwidth offered by Wi-Fi 6, you’ll get dependable, ultra-responsive connectivity for faster downloads, real-time gaming and seamless streaming of high-definition movies and videos. Wi-Fi 6 provides the highest level of performance in busy multi-device households and delivers the best Wi-Fi experience as the smart home gets smarter with more devices on the network.  This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.