Ever wondered what vehicles women most desire? A mom’s taxi or a nippy little hatchback probably spring to mind. That’s certainly the case overseas… but not in South Africa. According to George Mienie, chief executive of AutoTrader, the most searched for vehicle among female South African motorists is none other than the Toyota Hilux, a bakkie. This finding is based on an analysis of search data on AutoTrader. “This will probably come as a big surprise to most people; we tend to associate women with sports utility vehicles (SUVs) and smaller cars. The popularity of the Hilux – a vehicle that would typically be associated with a male driver – among female South Africans is further testament to its iconic status in this country,” Mienie said. The female driver stereotype does apply in countries such as the United States. According to a recent study by automotive research company iSeeCars.com1, the Hyundai Tuscon is the single-most popular car among female motorists in the US. In second position, is the Nissan Versa (we know it as the Tiida or Almera), followed by the Volkswagen Beetle. The Kia Forte (the Cerato in South Africa) and Ford Fiesta are in fourth and fifth positions respectively. There isn’t one single bakkie in the top 10 list produced by iSeeCars.com. In sixth place is the Kia Sorento, seventh is the Jeep Patriot, the Mitsubishi Outlander clocks in at eighth position, the Kia Rio in ninth and the Kia Soul in tenth. So much for the United States and the buying preferences of women there. Which is the second most popular vehicle amongst female South Africans? The Volkswagen Polo is in second, with third position going to the Ford Ranger. “This may come as a surprise to many. Like the Hilux, the Ranger is popular here in South Africa – and it clearly has its female fans too,” said Mienie. The top five are rounded out by the BMW 3 Series and the Toyota Fortuner. The Mercedes-Benz C-Class came sixth followed by the Volkswagen Golf (seventh), BMW 1 Series (eighth), Audi A3 (ninth) and the Volkswagen Polo Vivo (tenth). Most searched for car models by women: Toyota Hilux  Volkswagen Polo  Ford Ranger  BMW 3 Series  Toyota Fortuner  Mercedes-Benz C-Class  Volkswagen Golf  BMW 1 Series  Audi A3  Volkswagen Polo Vivo  Read: All new Toyota and Lexus cars sold in South Africa will have WiFi