While South Africa’s major banking strike was interdicted at the last minute, a number of other unions and industry bodies have indicated that they are planning industrial action soon. In a briefing following the court ruling – in which the Labour Court ruled in favour of Business Unity South Africa, interdicting the planned strike – Cosatu said that it will reapply for permission to strike and that it would be happening sooner rather than later. “By the 7th of October we will be going out – we are not going to demobilise,” Cosatu said. “We are saying to our members, we do not expect you to be out there tomorrow on the streets, but let’s continue to mobilise and continue to fight against the scourge of retrenchments.” Motor Sector strike The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) said it will also likely go on a strike in the motor sector after talks with employers failed. The union is demanding transport and night shift allowances for low paid fuel station employees who work awkward hours, as well as a three-year non-negotiable wage deal. “We have arranged formal conciliation on 30 September 2019 under the auspices of the CCMA,” said spokesperson Phakamile Hlubi-Majola “If conciliation fails, then we are well within our rights to request a strike certificate for an industry-wide shutdown.” South African Airways pilots The South African Pilots Association said on Thursday (26 September) that a majority of its members are in favour of going on strike to force change within the struggling national flag carrier. The union said that it is concerned about the current state of the national airline and that it planned to engage in a strike action to ‘enforce a higher standard’. “It needs to be understood that the decision to embark on industrial action is not one that the pilots of SAA will take lightly. Indeed, if such a strike is embarked upon, it would be for the first time in SAA’s 80-year history,” Saapa said in a statement. “The pilots of SAA and the leadership of Saapa cannot allow SAA to continue as if it is business as usual. Our numerous engagements with the company have not yielded outcomes that give us confidence in the future of the airline.” Read: South African banking strike postponed – not cancelled: Cosatu 