RAM Mounts is the leading manufacturer of rugged, reliable, and versatile mounting systems, and  designs and manufactures world-leading mounts and patented protective skins that secure your valuable electronics and accessories in virtually any vehicle or environment. The mounts are made with aircraft grade aluminium, stainless steel, high Strength composite and Nitrile Rubber components, which allow you to mount any device including phones, tablets, GPS units, cameras, laptops, and other mobile devices, anywhere – be it in your car, on your motorcycle, kayaks, airplanes, in your home, and even forklifts. Click here to view RAM Mounts’ catalogue for mounting systems targeted at specific industries. The multitude of components available are all interchangeable and allow users to adjust whatever they are mounting to the perfect angle in seconds. The X-Grip mount, for example, is designed with a RAM patented rubber ball and socket system that has adjustment points at both ends of the double socket arm giving you almost infinite adjustments and perfect viewing angles. All RAM Mounts components are easy to use and assemble, are compatible and interchangeable with any device, and take less than a second to mount or unmount. “Think of RAM as being Lego for mounts where pieces can be interchanged depending on the device or what it is being mounted into or onto,” the company said. What’s more is that RAM Mounts offers a lifetime warranty on 90% of their products with an exception on electronics and rubber consumer parts, which have a 3-year warranty. RAM products are designed and manufactured in the USA, and they have over 7,200 mounts mainly aimed at electronics. “We are also the only mount that has been Federal Aviation (FAA) approved for use in-cockpit in airplanes,” said RAM Mounts. Watch the video below to see how the mounting systems work. RAM Mounts will also be exhibiting at South Africa’s leading international trade fair for the automotive service industry – Automechanika Johannesburg – which takes place from 18-21 September 2019. To visit the RAM Mounts stand and see what they have on offer, register for Automechanika Johannesburg here. To find out more about their mounting systems, visit the RAM Mounts website or email info@ram-mount.co.za  This article was published in partnership with RAM Mounts.