Immigration consultants have seen a jump in South Africans moving to Canada, says Nicholas Avramis of Beaver Immigration. Speaking to CapeTalk, Avramis said that the while crime remains a concern for many of the applicants, the major narrative is that skilled South Africans workers are seeking better economic prosperity. According to Pew Research, more than 50,000 South Africans reside in Canada, while census data shows that approximately 1,000 South Africans make the move each year. Avramis said that one of the most popular routes for these South Africans is the federal skills programme which works on a points system. Points are awarded for criteria including age, level of experience, level of education and the type of work you are qualified for. This creates a ranking and applicants are selected from these rankings by the Canadian government, based on the skills that it is looking for, he said. “There is no set rule in term of a ‘cut-off because you get points’. The older you are the (fewer) points you get. “One of the other most important criteria is English proficiency. If you plan to move to Canada on any of the different visas they offer you are going to have to write an English test somewhere down the line,” he said. Skills Avramis said that the more educated you are the more likely you are to successfully apply. However, he noted that there was a ‘sweet spot’ that allowed more South Africans to move to Canada in recent years, as they meet the correct criteria. This includes: People between the ages of 25-30;
People who have a master’s degree;
A person who has been working for two-three years in a ‘skilled job’;
A person who scored highly in their English proficiency exam. “If you meet these criteria you could land in Canada at the airport and they could hand you the PR (permit) papers on arrival,” said Avramis. He added that one shouldn’t look at the type of job that a person does per se. “In terms, of skilled jobs, the Canadian government classifies about 3,0000 jobs as skilled. However, even managing a coffee shop would be considered ‘skilled’. “It more comes down to your age and your English proficiency,” he said. “The government of Canada just wants younger people and there is a reason for that.” Read: South Africa’s tax base is shrinking