Pick n Pay has opened its new state-of-the-art store in the Mall of Africa. The retailer said that the new 4,367sqm outlet will be one of its signature next-generation stores which are designed to offer an improved shopping experience for customers. The new stores have a strong focus on fresh produce, with a third of the store dedicated to fresh and perishable produce. Customers can also expect a variety of unique counters, ranging from fresh sushi to cheese and biltong. The stores chilled fish counter, butchery, bakery, deli and hot food counter will offer customers the produce prepared for their specific needs, while the new outlet also includes an in-store clothing department and a liquor store.    “We’ve created a modern and convenient destination for our customers to shop – for a quick meal on the go, daily top-up shopping or end of month groceries,” said Pick n Pay Mall of Africa store manager Tshepo Motelung. “We are excited to welcome customers and to offer them great value, a variety of fresh offerings and everyday savings.” Changes Pick n Pay said that it has 26 next-generation stores in the pipeline with early customer feedback being overwhelmingly positive. Some of the biggest changes include: More space: The new stores are designed to be light, bright and spacious, and free of clutter. Pick n Pay said that its grocery aisles are also wider, with gondola ends dedicated to promotional offers; New tech: Advanced mobile technology includes dedicated store WiFi and mobile smart devices which allow staff to scan product barcodes to determine the quantity and location of stock on hand, order directly to the shop floor, and print shelf-edge labels. Pick n Pay said that this advancement in technology has allowed it to reduce space in the back office and devote more space to the trading floor; More private label products: Next Generation stores feature expanded private-label ranges which have shown good growth across all categories, Pick n Pay said. The retailer currently offers more than 900 private label offerings which have shown good growth across all categories, particularly in its convenience range such as garlic breads, pizzas, beef lasagne, and other ready meals; Improved money counters: Pick n Pay said that its new money counters have enabled the expansion of value-added services to include event and travel ticketing, Lotto, gift cards and financial services. The counters also offer a selected range of cellular products, including handsets and accessories.   Competition Pick n Pay is not the only retailer which is revamping its stores, with Checkers introducing new FreshX concept stores. The concept stores were introduced by Checkers as a way for the company to gain market share among more affluent South Africans, with the idea proving so popular that the group now plans to revamp at least a third of its Checkers stores to the new look in the medium term. Unlike traditional Checkers stores, the FreshX concept stores feature more upmarket furniture and signage – including benches and tables for customers to test samples. They also include a number of non-food sections for electronics and outdoor equipment. Read: New Checkers concept stores target wealthier South Africans – here’s how they look 