Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: The ANC’s NEC will soon present the outcomes of its special meeting held over the weekend to discuss the economic plans outlined by finance minister Tito Mboweni. A discussion document seen by some media indicated that the sale of some state owned companies was raised at the meeting – which is only one topic among many discussed. [ENCA] Further investigations into ties between politicians and companies are bearing fruit. A new report by amaBhungane has linked R15 million in apparent kickbacks being paid by government tender winners in Tshwane to a slash fund owned by EFF leader Julius Malema. Meanwhile, luxury SUVs being driven by DA leader Mmusi Maimane were found to be paid for and donated by fraud-accused ex-Steinhoff boss, Markus Jooste. [amaBhungane, Rapport] The Special Investigations Unit’s (SIU) special tribunal says it is ready to start its work, which could see South Africa claw back almost R15 billion in money that was looted during the many years of state capture. The tribunal is a swifter route to getting the money back, as the courts are clogged up with other cases and move too slow to get the job done efficiently. [702] The Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) says there is no clear or conclusive indication that any money laundering took place in the CR17 saga, which has led to a major battle between the Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane and the presidency. Mkhwebane used financial records provided by the FIC to accuse president Ramaphosa of lying to parliament, and saying there were merits in suspecting the president of money laundering. [M&G] The pressure on emerging markets is mounting, as the US continues to make waves in the global market. Washington announced over the weekend that the US was investigating ways to limit its portfolio investment flows to China, although the US Treasury subsequently denied plans to block Chinese listings on US stock exchanges. On Monday, the rand was at R15.15 to the dollar, R18.62 to the pound and R16.56 to the euro.