Online course website Class Central has released its annual ranking of the world’s best Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). The ranking is based on over 60,000 user reviews and is sorted by the Bayesian average of their ratings, with Class Central removing programmers with fewer reviews and courses that have been discontinued. The Top 100 List features courses from 53 universities in 18 countries. Three universities have five courses in the top 100, including: Massachusetts Institute of Technology (US);
University of Sheffield (UK);
University of Cape Town (South Africa). Coursera is the top course platform with 45 courses, followed by edX (24) and FutureLearn (17). “This news is testament to the passion and expertise of our fabulous academics who have opened their teaching to a global audience and to the production teams who have designed such high-quality online courses,” said Sukaina Walji, the online education project manager at the Centre for Innovation in Learning and Teaching (CILT) – who create UCT’s MOOCs. “It’s a nice acknowledgement. For UCT, as a university with fewer resources compared to others globally, it’s not an insignificant achievement.” “Universities have been doing this kind of outreach for a long time – public lectures and other forms of public engagement – and with the online mode they are able to reach a very large global audience,” said the CILT’s Andrew Deacon. “UCT’s first online course was launched in 2015. We’ve launched 20 so far and there are a couple more to come this year.” You can find a full list of the ranked courses here. Alternatively, you can find a list of the top courses offered by UCT through FutureLearn and Coursera below: What Is a Mind? – Explore the most pertinent scientific and philosophical concepts for understanding our own minds with this free online course; Education for All: Disability, Diversity and Inclusion – Discover ways to make education more inclusive, especially in areas where resources are limited; Extinctions: Past and Present – Discover the diversity of life on earth, the impacts of five past mass extinctions and the prospect of a sixth extinction today; Medicine and the Arts: Humanising Healthcare – Explore the field of medical humanities – the intersection of the arts, humanities and healthcare – with this free online course; Understanding Clinical Research: Behind the Statistics – If you’ve ever skipped over`the results section of a medical paper because terms like “confidence interval” or “p-value” go over your head, then you’re in the right place. Read: This 7-day Harvard course ‘for the rich’ costs R860,000 – here’s what a similar course costs in South Africa