Those in corporate job roles often demand high performing computers with modern features that allow them to work efficiently from anywhere. Whether it’s in the office, traveling, delivering a presentation, speaking at a conference, or working remotely. To cater to the demands of these professionals, HP has developed their premium laptop range, providing unthrottled performance whenever, wherever. Click here to get a quote on HP premium PCs from MicroPoint today. HP premium laptops are the ideal business solution for business professionals, as they encompass a host of features to help professionals do their work wherever they are. These features include durability, security, and power. HP premium laptops are said to be the world’s most secure and manageable laptops. They come with integrated security and privacy features, detecting threats and recovering your system automatically to help you control what the world sees, and protect your valuable data no matter where you go.  The laptops professionals use must be reliable and secure, protecting sensitive information from being compromised, but you also need something with a slim, sleek design which is easy to carry around. HP premium laptops balance elegance and mobility a high-brightness FHD screen display.   Those in a professional job role also often need to deliver a presentation with audio, which makes the integrated sound system imperative. HP’s premium laptops incorporate 5 audio speakers by Bang and Olufsen and come with HP Noise Cancellation, meaning your audio will always be clear. Even if you simply want to listen to music while you work, your music will be crisp.  HP premium PCs offer up to 15 hours and 30 minutes of battery life – a necessity for those frequently on the move. To add to that, it also has HP Fast charge capabilities, so you’ll never run out of power. Micropoint SA is a leading distributor of HP desktop and laptop computers in South Africa. They have a large import base and strong relationship with local suppliers, which puts them in the perfect position to offer a comprehensive range of products at competitive pricing, catering to all their customers’ needs. Visit their website to get a quote on your computer requirements or to find out more.  This article was published in partnership with HP JMA.