Construction has begun on phase 2 of the massive Zululami luxury coastal estate on KZN’s north coast. The area – owned by the Collins Group and the Royal Shaka Property Group – covers some 5,000 hectares between Sheffield Beach and Blythedale and has been earmarked for massive residential, resort and commercial property developments, at a cost of approximately R76 billion. Phase 1 of the first zone included 350 stands as well as several sectional title developments. Phase 2 will primarily focus on the premium sea-facing stands within the estate. “We have already seen how in-demand the North Coast property market is, with the R76 billion masterplan in motion from the Royal Shaka Property Group,” said Murray Collins of Collins Residential. “This is not to mention the facelift the local shopping centres and amenities are experiencing, along with further upgrades to the roads.” The map below shows the current estate plans:  Phase 2 Phase 2 of the development will focus on 107 spacious, luxury residential stands varying from 880m² to 2100m², that boast views of the Indian Ocean. Zululami is set across 140 hectares of indigenous natural landscape in Sheffield Beach, KwaZulu-Natal’s North Coast. “Construction is in full tilt, as a result we already have the Gatehouse complete, while the construction on the Wetland clubhouse has begun with landscaping, roads and elevated boardwalks underway,” said Collins. “The first transfers are set to take place at the end of August 2019. “It is evident that Zululami has had a massive impact on the KZN economy and masterplan for the North Coast. Coupled with the recent launch of Seaton, along with the steady progression seen on Zululami, we will see the North Coast rapidly transform.” The Seaton is set to become one of South Africa’s landmark equestrian estates with about 3,776 homes, an equine district, a lifestyle village and a private school and college node. Part of the plan includes an olympic-size indoor show-jumping arena, polo fields and a horse training venue.   Population growth The North Coast has grown exponentially in recent years, and several new developments have either been completed or are well underway. According to Tim Johnson, principal of Seeff North Coast, Ballito’s permanent population has grown from 12,000 to 30,000 residents in just over ten years, with more than R2.7 billion in residential sales per annum. An additional R3 billion has also occurred within the new estates between Umhlanga and Ballito in the past 18 months, he said. “Following the opening of King Shaka International Airport in 2010, there has been huge growth in air traffic where estimations now predict that passenger arrivals are expected to hit the million mark by 2025,” Johnson said. “In May this year, British Airways announced direct flights to and from King Shaka to the UK adding to the growing list of direct international flights which has encouraged many business people and investors to buy homes on the North Coast.” Read: Something has happened in South Africa’s housing market not seen since 2011 