The South African Police Service (SAPS) has embarked on a nationwide recruitment drive in an effort to bolster crime fighting efforts. SAPS management said it is seeking to attract youth between the ages of 18 and 30 for the 2019/2020 Basic Police Learning Development Programme (BLDP) intake. Prospective applicants will need a Senior Certificate/National Senior Certificate or National Certificate (Vocational), while those in possession of post matric qualifications are encouraged to apply. “Those who previously served in a government department and were subsequently dismissed due to misconduct are discouraged from applying,” SAPS said. The police service said that applicants will be subjected to fitness, psychometric and integrity testing as well as medical evaluations during the recruitment, selection and enlistment process. Vetting and fingerprint verifications will also be conducted. “Successful police trainees will be subjected to continuous security and fitness screening, which included continuous verification of criminal profile as well as medical and physical fitness (inclusive of drug/substance abuse testing),” it said. During the training phase, trainees will receive a R4,500 stipend. According to salary data for South African police officers from the Institute for Security Studies (ISS), SAPS salaries range between R175,000 and R407,000. South Africa needs more police officers In an interview in June, police minister Bheki Cele said that the country’s police officer to citizen ratio is currently 1 to 383. This is far-removed from the international standard of 1 to 220. Cele said that police recruitment has been hampered by a ‘chicken and egg situation’, as the government can’t hire more officers due to economic restraints, while the high level of crime is impacting the economy. “Usually people talk about the bloated civil service, but what is not mentioned are the areas that still need to (hire). At the present moment, there are 193,000 police officers, which is 60,000 short of the international ratio. “We hope that we will be able to reach these figures within the next five years,” Cele said. Requirements Deputy National Commissioner: Human Resources Management, Lieutenant General Bonang Mgwenya, said SAPS is seeking women recruits in particular. “We are therefore encouraging all youths from all walks of life to join the service and contribute to a safe and secure South Africa. To ensure that we attract the right people into the service, we have developed a rigorous and thorough recruitment process that includes psychometric, fitness and integrity testing. “Successful applicants will add to the existing workforce capacity at stations to ensure that the people of South Africa are and feel safe. We wish the applicants all the best in their endeavours to join the service. We are looking forward to welcoming upright, disciplined and accountable individuals who are ready to serve the nation,” said Mgwenya. Successful applicants will be trained at any SAPS Academy around the country, and should expect to be placed at any police station/unit upon completion of training. Recruitment will take place in the following streams: Stream 1 Applicants in possession of a Senior Certificate / National Senior Certificate / National Certificate (Vocational);
Applicants who successfully completed the Military Skills Cadet Development Programme with the South African National Defence Force;
Successful applicants in Stream 1 will undergo a 21 month training programme consisting of three phases:

Induction Phase – One month at a designated police station.
Basic Training Phase – Eight months Basic Training at a designated SAPS Academy.
Probation Phase – After successful completion of the Induction and the Basic Training Phase, the police trainee shall be appointed as a member of the Service under probation for a period of 12 months. Stream 2 Applicants who fully completed a three (3) year National Diploma / Degree recorded on the National Learner Record Database (NLRD) on at least a NQF 6 or higher level in Law / Policing / Criminology / Law Enforcement / Forensic Investigation.
Applications close on the 15th October 2019 and it must be noted that the Service will no longer receive applications after the closing date.
Successful candidates will be notified telephonically and will undergo a 21-month training programme at any SAPS Academy nationwide. If applicants have not heard or received an official correspondence from the SAPS within three months of the closing date, applicants should consider their application as unsuccessful, the police service said. Read: Joburg clamps down on crime with 1,500 new police officers 