New proposals by the task team set up by president Cyril Ramaphosa on e-tolls includes motorists paying 10 cents to pass under each gantry – up to a maximum of R100 a month, according to a report in the City Press. Documents obtained by the City Press outline the task team’s suggestions, which include a discount of 70% of the current fees for Gauteng’s e-tolls – or scrapping the unpopular toll completely. “The likelihood is that tolls will be kept at reduced fees, possibly maximum R100 per user per month or just 10c per gantry pass,” a source told the City Press. The president had given the Department of Transport, roads agency Sanral, the Gauteng provincial government and Treasury until the end of August to come up with a solution. The task team has however, reportedly been unable to find common ground on a solution, and will present all available options to Cabinet. Transport minister Fikile Mbalula met with the Automobile Association (AA) and the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) as part of efforts to find a solution to e-tolls, which has been largely rejected by the province’s road users. The Automobile Association of South Africa (AA) has warned that the current model for the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project (GFIP) has failed and will continue to do so if pursued. A recent report by the group found that most e-toll road users are not paying because of a principled position taken years ago and that no amount of cajoling or enticement will change their minds. Outa has also called for the system to be scrapped, noting that compliance by motorists has dropped from the scheme’s highest point of 40% in June 2014 to around 20%, bringing in just R55 million a month. This has resulted in a shortfall of almost R250 million per month. A statement put out by the Department of Transport on Saturday, noted that the e-tolls consultation period has been extended. “The stakeholder engagement process is a genuine consultation process that seeks to balance the views that have been punted in public discourse in a meaningful way… “We are on track and remain firmly committed to finalising this process in the next two weeks,” said minister Mbalula.  Read: Motorists will be fined hundreds of rands for not paying e-tolls under new laws: DA