Property portal CareerJunction has published its latest jobs index, showing which skills are in the greatest demand in South Africa right now. The CareerJunction Index (CJI) represents online labour dynamics in South Africa by providing a detailed analysis of the relative ratio of supply and demand in the online job market. It is based on comprehensive data gathered from the CareerJunction website. According to the group the index settled just above the 100 mark for August, indicating stable online labour market conditions. Job search activity decreased slightly while labour demand remained unchanged. “The architecture & engineering and construction sectors have seen a notable decrease in labour demand over the last 12 months. Year-on-year, jobs have decreased by more than 40%,” the group said. Trending jobs for August include nursing / professional caregiving, IT project administration / management and business analysis. Top employment sectors include the medical & health, IT,  architecture & engineering, manufacturing & assembly and business & management sectors. These are the three job types trending right now: Nursing / Professional Caregiving Average salary offerings for intermediate level position: GP R22,467 to R31,833 p.m.
WC R24,628 to R35,432 p.m.
KZN R26,933 to R31,204 p.m. IT Project Administration / Management Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP R41,798 to R56,526 p.m.
WC R49,804 to R62,549 p.m.
KZN Not available. Business Analysis Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP R37,326 to R47,660 p.m.
WC R38,967 to R45,017 p.m.
KZN Not available Most in-demand skills The group’s data showed that the most sought-after skills are in software development, management and in sales representatives and consultants. Software development is a highly sought-after skills set in South Africa. Hiring activity for software developers increased by more than 20% since June 2019. There is a high demand for professionals with management skills, particularly in the financial sector. Currently, 40% of managerial vacancies are allocated to sales and financial managers. Despite a recent decrease in demand of more than 10%, sales representatives/ consultants remain in high demand within the South African job market.  A recent uptake in jobs is evident for the ICT and business & management sectors as well as the medical sector, CareerJunction said. The admin, office & support sector, as well as the cleaning, maintenance & repair and manufacturing & assembly sectors saw minimal changes in labour demand over the past few months. However, job ad volumes remain lower than the same period last year. The architecture & engineering and construction sectors have seen a notable decrease in labour demand over the last 12 months. Year-on-year, jobs have decreased by more than 40%. The sales sector also saw a recent dip in jobs, however, sales professionals remain in high demand, the group said. Read: More than 30 jobs that South Africans can soon use to move to the UK 