An increasing number of wealthy South Africans are looking at buying into eco estates for the security and other amenities they provide, according to real estate company Seeff. In addition to traditional facilities like golf courses and restaurants, eco estates also place an emphasis on nature through features such as sustainable building practices and solar technologies. Below Seeff highlighted a number of these estates throughout the country, and how much it costs to buy a home there. KZN North Coast Tim Johnson, Principal of Seeff North Coast, said that many of the established and new estates in the region have made an effort when it comes to the principles of greener living. “Established estates like Simbithi, Dunkirk, Brettenwood, Palm Lakes and Zimbali have in their own way already created vibrant communities, challenged traditional building practices and protected some of our most precious fauna and flora, while newcomers like Elaleni and Zululami are looking to set new benchmarks,” he said. In Elaleni 17.5 hectares of the 46 hectares of the estate are made up of a protected and rare swamp forest with an enchanting raised walkway. “There are also numerous conservation servitudes and beautifully designed and landscaped common spaces,” he said. The price of land in Elaleni range between R1,635,000 to R3,850,000 and turn-key homes cost between R5,850,000 and R6,790,000. Land in Zululami is available from R910,000 to R3,942,500 and sectional title is available from R2,024,000 to R4,190,000.  KZN South Coast Janene Letcher, sales administrator at Seeff South Coast, said this area boasts three eco estates: The Farm, Tabamanzi and Bayhill. “These estates all have very strict building regulations which all new homeowners need to adhere to. Fauna and flora is protected and Bayhill even offers a hide where residents can enjoy bird watching,” she said. Entry-level prices in The Farm are about R1,900,000 and can go up to R3,500,000. Vacant land in this estate is scarce as no one is willing to sell. Tabamanzi is very small and is situated inside the Farm. The African design with thatched roofs offers 12 unique homes. Bayhill has entry-level prices of about R2 million.  Limpopo Thorny Bush Estate is the first residential golf estate and Wildlife Reserve in the Mokopane region. “As resources such as water and electricity become more costly and scarcer, owners are encouraged to design homes that maximise resource demand efficiencies,” said Rob Hudson, one of the developers of Thorny Bush. “As a collective it becomes more affordable to become self-sustainable as opposed to doing so on an individual basis, especially with the provision of water.” Entry-level prices in the estate start from around R450,000 and prices can go up to R1,250,000. Pretoria “The Hills Estate, Silver Lakes Estate and property bordering the Nature Reserve in Faerie Glen all offer nature lovers something a little out of the ordinary,” said Gerhard van der Linde, Seeff’s MD in Pretoria East. “The Hills Lifestyle and Eco Estate is an upmarket secure 480ha estate only minutes away from major amenities, but also boasts untold open space, antelope including zebra, a fishing dam, tropical plants and 12 km walking trails. “Silver Lakes equally boasts beautiful walking trails, lakes, dams, natural areas, over 140 bird species and game such as kudu, njala, springbok and impala,” he said. The Hills offer stands between R1 million and R2 million, with smaller apartments within the same price range, while homes start at R3 million going up to R15 million. Silver Lakes still has stands available for less than R2 million, with two bedroom apartments starting off at R1.2 million. The most expensive homes in Silver Lakes are on the market for between R15 million and R20 million.  Johannesburg Frans van Staden, Seeff’s MD in Meyersdal, said the upmarket Meyersdal Eco Estate forms part of the greater 1100 hectare Meyersdal Nature Estate. “People who reside here live in unspoiled nature areas where endangered fauna and flora species are protected, while only being 10 minutes south of Johannesburg CBD. “Meyersdal also boasts 16 km of mountain bike track, three dams with indigenous fish species, 14 Game species including Kudo and Steenbuck, many bird species and a 7km hiking trail.” The majority of properties here are priced between R7 million and R22 million. Read: This affordable housing development in Joburg has just won an international award 