Ipsos has published its Global Trustworthiness Index, showing that scientists are considered the most trustworthy professionals in the world. The index – which is based on a survey of more than 19,587 adults across 23 countries – showed that while the most trustworthy profession varies across the countries covered, there is greater agreement on the professions considered to be untrustworthy. In all countries polled, politicians are seen as the most untrustworthy profession. Globally, two-thirds of the public consider politicians generally to be untrustworthy (67%) and almost six in ten say the same about government ministers (57%). “Emerging economies such as South Africa, Argentina, Brazil and Mexico tend to be much less trustful of both government and public services – perhaps reflecting relatively high levels of concern about corruption in many of those countries,” Ipsos said. “European countries, meanwhile, are particularly suspicious of business.” The survey showed that the most trusted profession in South Africa are doctors, while the least trusted profession is politicians.  Other trustworthy professions include: Scientists are the most trustworthy profession in Argentina, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Sweden and Turkey; Doctors are the most trustworthy for citizens of Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Great Britain, South Africa, Spain and Sweden (where they are tied with scientists); Teachers are the most trustworthy profession for Brazilians and Americans; Members of the armed forces are the fourth most trustworthy profession overall, seen as trustworthy by 43%. Perceptions of the trustworthiness of servicemen and women are highest in China (72%), India (70%) and the US (60%), while they are particularly low in Germany (24%) and South Korea (18%); Trust in the police – overall the fifth-most trusted profession on 38% – ranges widely from 80% in China to 11% in Mexico. In addition to China, a majority of the public consider the police to be trustworthy in Australia (56%), France (53%), Canada (52%) and Italy (50%). Read: 3 interview questions job seekers struggle with the most 