FNB has unveiled the first phase of its BankCity revitalisation project in Johannesburg’s inner-city. Located in Newtown, BankCity currently serves as one of FNB’s major headquarters with nearly 12,000 employees occupying its properties, spanning 181,000 square metres. The revamped precinct will include a variety of retail outlets offering a diverse range of eateries, shopping and lifestyle options for employees as well as all residents of, and visitors to the inner city. The bank said that the project will feature a combination of 34 retail tenants that are open to all residents and visitors of the inner-city. Except for one flooring supplier, all the businesses contracted to provide materials and construction services for the upgrade were Gauteng based. Speaking on the unveiling, FNB CEO Jacques Celliers said that the new BankCity project showed FNB’s commitment to Johannesburg. “When we first opened our FNB head office in Simmonds street, we expressed our commitment to be a part of the growth and evolution of the Johannesburg city centre,” he said. “Over the years, we have stayed true to this commitment by investing heavily, fostering partnerships with the City and private sector to make the inner-city a better place to work and live in. “Our investment in BankCity is a tangible demonstration of our understanding of the vital role that inner-cities play as hubs of growth, inclusion, employment and contributors to social and economic development.” These picture show the before and after plans of the first phase of BankCity:   For employees and everyday South Africans With over 12,000 FNB employees working in the precinct, CEO of FNB Corporate and Retail Estate Lee-Anne van Zyl said that it was important to encourage the concept of ‘Work. Eat. Play’ as part of its employee value proposition. “We are excited about the possibilities that this revamp, combined with the ongoing rejuvenation of our two piazza areas, creates for fantastic working and living experiences, ranging from exciting urban markets, music and food festivals, and of course a growing tourism industry because of our partnership with the Red Bus tour company and the presence of our Madiba  installation.” The iMadiba project is a global initiative involving an international network of artistic recreations of Nelson Mandela’s Robben Island cell. The micro-museums encourage personal reflection and promote conversation and dialogue. “We are committed to not only being present in the Johannesburg inner-city, but being instrumental in the realisation of its full potential,” said van Zyl. Read: A look at Absa’s plan to make Joburg CBD safer – including using drones