The UK Government is expanding its Shortage Occupation List (SOL), making it easier for applicants to apply, qualify and settle in the UK. According to immigration consultants Breytenbachs, employers will also benefit if a job title is on the SOL as they do not need to do a Resident Labour Market Test (RLMT). “If a job title is not on the Shortage Occupation List, the UK employer have to prove that there was an attempt to recruit persons from within the UK. “As soon as a job title is on the SOL, this is no longer required, making it easier for the UK employer to recruit a non-EU citizen,” it said. Breytenbachs added that if a  job title is on the SOL at any point during the five years leading to a settlement in the UK, the person does not have to fulfil the minimum income threshold currently set at £35,000 per annum. “The visa application fees for job titles on SOL is lower than for other Tier 2 visa application fees. The visa application fees for the dependents of the main visa applicant are also lower. “If the monthly cap on restricted Certificates of Sponsorship is reached, the job titles on SOL are prioritised. It is thus very unlikely that jobs on the SOL will get turned down due to the cap.” New job titles Breytenbachs said that the following tier 2 job titles will soon be added to the shortage occupation list: Biological scientists and biochemists; Civil engineers, mechanical engineers, electrical engineers, design and development engineers, production and process engineers, engineering professionals; IT business analysts, architects and system designers; Programmers and software development professionals, web design and development professionals; Medical practitioners, psychologists, veterinarians, medical radiographers, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists; Nurses; Secondary education teachers in the subjects of maths, physics, science, computer science and Mandarin; Architects; Social workers; Paramedics; Some dancers, choreographers and musicians; Graphic designers; Some jobs in the welding trades. “These Tier 2 job titles are not on the Shortage Occupation List at present,” Breytebncahs said. “We will inform clients as soon we receive final confirmation. We expect an announcement in this regard during November 2019. You can read more on the Tier 2 Skilled Worker route here.” Read: South Africans are applying for asylum in Ireland 