Ford South Africa says that it is aware of some security issues which has led to some of its older models being targeted by criminals. In a statement published on Twitter, the motoring group said that its older EcoSport and Fiesta were at risk, but said that newer models are not affected. It added that it was in the process of finalising solutions which we will be communicating to customers as a matter of urgency. “In some break-ins we are finding that the alarm does not sound, although the immobiliser is still active,” said Ford South Africa corporate transformation manager, Craig von Essen. “We really regret the inconvenience to our customers and will soon be launching the following enhancements: Firstly, if a vehicle already has an alarm we’ll make sure that it sounds when the key lock is tampered with.
If a vehicle does not have a standard alarm we will offer one as an accessory which will go off if the lock is tampered with.
The third option is that we will replace the lock with a new remote and a high-security key. “We are also looking at the security system in our other Ford models and if our customers have any concerns we do encourage them to contact us through our Facebook and Twitter social media platforms,” he said.  Earlier this month, Mybroadband reported that a number of Ford drivers had complained about the lock system used for their vehicles, which made it easy for criminals to open their cars. Many of the victims have taken to social media to complain about the issue, but they say Ford is ignoring their concerns. According to Ford owner Briony Simon “Ford has chosen to ignore their customer complaints about their locks clearly not being effective”. She said daily posts of people’s “Ford cars being broken into through the lock” have been posted online, but the company is not responding to these posts. She posted a photo of two Ford Fiestas and a Ford Focus which were targeted at Centurion Mall recently. These are also reports of Ford Rangers which have been hit. Read: The seating plan that will best keep your kids safe in a hijacking in South Africa