Ford South Africa says it will fix potential security risks to certain Fiesta and EcoSport models, specifically around manipulating the driver’s door, which can ultimately provide access to the cabin if deliberately targeted. The motoring group recently announced that it is aware of issues which has led to some of its older models being targeted by criminals. Ford said in a statement said that its older EcoSport and Fiesta were at risk, but stressed that newer models are not affected. It said that it is in the process of finalising solutions which it will communicate to customers as a matter of urgency. “In many of the reported instances the alarm (if fitted) does not sound when access is gained via the key lock barrel,” Ford South Africa said. “We have been testing various options,” it said, highlighting the following: The first is a reconfiguration that will ensure the alarm (if existing) will remain active when entry to the vehicle is gained using the key lock on the driver’s door. Customers will need to schedule an appointment with their dealer of choice. They can begin doing this from 6 May. The reconfiguration will take less than an hour and there will be a nominal cost to the customer of R155.25 (incl. VAT); Customers who require a door lock replacement as a result of their vehicle being tampered with can make an appointment with their dealer and should expect to pay no more than R1,199 (incl. VAT). Only customers that have had their locks broken should have them replaced; For Fiesta Ambiente customers whose vehicles do not have an alarm as standard fitment and would like one fitted as an additional layer of protection, the cost will be R1,886 (incl. VAT). We will communicate with customers as soon as this accessory becomes available (it is likely to be the second half of May); Finally, Ford is investigating a security replacement lock accessory that will only allow access via the remote key fob or a non-standard ultra-high security style “Hykee” mechanical key. The accessory has been developed with our team in Europe and can be retrofitted to Fiesta and EcoSport. We will communicate timing and cost with our customers as soon as this accessory becomes available. “Ford and its dealer body are committed to ensuring the highest levels of service and customer satisfaction,” the company said. Read: Ford South Africa says it is aware of vehicles being targeted by criminals – these are the cars at risk