Mars Wrigley Confectionery, the world’s largest maker of chocolate, chewing gum, mints and fruity confections has launched its ‘world’s sweetest internship’ for 2019. The internship is an 8 to 12 week, fully paid opportunity with a signing bonus of one year’s worth of candy. Based at the company’s global headquarters on Goose Island in Chicago, the internship includes trips to nearby manufacturing sites, where the intern will go behind-the-scenes to see firsthand how the company’s products are made. They also get to sample a wide spectrum of chocolate, gum and fruity confections. This will include tasting flavours that haven’t yet reached the public and brand varieties that are offered in 180 countries around the world. In addition to working closely with the Mars Wrigley Foundation leadership, the intern will also have to collaborate with corporate affairs and community engagement teams to apply their expertise and to execute a signature Mars Volunteer Program event at the end of the summer. The internship is open to anyone who is least 21 years of age as of 20 May 2019, is a high school graduate or equivalent, and is passionate about Chicago. You can read more about the internship here. Top South African bursary? BusinessTech recently looked at some of the best bursaries and internships available in South Africa. Arguably the stand out is Sasol’s corporate bursary programme which is open to high-performing mathematics and science learners currently in Grade 12. The bursary covers bursars’ tuition fees, accommodation, meals, textbooks and pocket money. Bursars receive allowances for study tools such as laptops and calculators. Sasol bursars also have the opportunity to do paid vacation work and to be part of the Graduate Development Programme when they complete their studies, the group said. “At Sasol, we help our bursars harness their potential, by offering them not only financing for their tertiary education but also the opportunity to start and succeed in their careers,” said Monica Luwes, manager of the Graduate Centre at Sasol. “This is our investment in building a high-performing workforce and in fostering sustainable socio-economic development to the benefit of the country as a whole.” Read: Sasol’s insane bursary is now open to candidates – here’s what it includes