Whether you’re a business owner, an HR manager, an attorney, or a legal advisor, dealing with any legal issue effectively and efficiently often requires in-depth understanding. This means you must expend hours of your valuable time and energy to acquire knowledge on practical law application for matters concerning corporate compliance, HR and workplace safety, and the like. Regardless of your vocation, being able to quickly access relevant information when a legal issue turns up is crucial. LexisNexis, in collaboration with many specialist legal practitioners, addresses this need through Lexis Practical Guidance – a useful, easy-to-navigate online tool, which is focused on helping people in any industry to bridge the gap between understanding the law and applying it. This practical online legal tool is a first of its kind in South Africa and covers hundreds of legal topics, divided into 30 main legal practice areas. The content is presented in the form of guidance notes, checklists, flowcharts, forms and precedent documents, key cases and legislation. It provides users with concise guidance and instant clarification on points of law, so they can easily understand what needs to be done and take suitable action. It provides nuanced understanding, as well as relevant, useful, and practical information – not only of the legal side, but also of the invaluable commercial and practical side of the law. While the content is simple enough for the junior practitioner or legal outsider, Lexis Practical Guidance also delivers enough depth and detail for the seasoned specialist. Senior practitioners will find that it helps to keep them well-informed of developments and best practices and facilitates insight into issues that arise outside of their main area of specialisation. It is also optimised for mobile use, which means you have access to Lexis Practical Guidance at your fingertips 24/7. Lexis Practical Guidance provides attorneys, in house legal counsel, compliance officers and other managers with confidence in the legal steps and processes that they face in the workplace. Navigate the complexities and nuances of legal practice with ease through a conveniently accessible online platform. It is like having your own specialist legal practitioner on your desktop. For more information or a free demo visit: lexisnexis.co.za/practical-guidance. This article was published in partnership with Lexis Nexis.