Listed investment firm Sabvest has acquired a 30% interest in, and will provide growth funding to Revix Group – a fintech startup with roots in Cape Town. Sabvest noted that Revix, which is now based in the UK, has developed a new generation digital asset management portal through which it provides digital asset technology services focused primarily on bundled cryptocurrency and security token investment solutions. “Revix empowers investors to purchase and manage their own diversified index tracking portfolios through ‘direct indexing’, a method for replicating the performance of an index by purchasing the underlying assets instead of buying an ETF, structured financial product or diversified fund. “Direct indexing is not a financial instrument. It is a technology which enables investors to instantly create, execute and manage several indices,” it said in a statement. This approach, it added, enables investors to access investment tools to gain cost-effective exposure to more than 80% of the cryptocurrency market though the Revix Top 10 Crypto Bundle. Its tech introduces passive digital asset index investments to investors globally, including South Africa. Revix’s solutions follow the directional growth and maturing applications of blockchain technologies and tokenised assets. “Security Token Offerings (STOs) are scheduled to be launched later in 2019 as part of its solution set in the increasingly diverse digital asset investment landscape,” Sabvest said. Sabvest is investing alongside co-founders Louis Buys and Sean Sanders. “We are excited to have the opportunity to back these innovative fintech entrepreneurs in the fast-evolving digital asset industry,” said Sabvest CEO, Chris Seabrooke. “We believe their unique direct indexing enabled technology is able to facilitate more dynamic and efficient investing in this asset class internationally.” “Sabvest has invested in a number of technology-focused companies as part of its portfolio over the years,” he added, “and that has included a global leader in distributed ledger technology, on which blockchain is based”. Read: 3 shares to buy for 2019 – including Telkom