Huawei Enterprise will continue to invest in South Africa, as the country remains an important market for the company. This is according to Alex Du, managing director of Huawei Enterprise South Africa, who was speaking to MyBroadband at Huawei Eco Connect 2019 in Johannesburg. In his keynote address at the event, Du Min said that Huawei Enterprise South Africa’s strategy for 2019 will centre around collaboration with partners and customers to develop industry-specific solutions that will enable flexible, open, and secure platforms to drive enterprise-level digital transformation. Through this collaboration, said Du Min, Huawei Enterprise will enable new ideas to be cultivated at a much faster pace. “Huawei Enterprise will continue to strengthen relationships with our partners in South Africa and fiercely support and enable them to achieve the best results for their businesses by equipping them with the latest technological advancements in this market,” Du Min said. The four key new technologies that Huawei Enterprise will focus on in 2019 are as follows: Huawei OceanStor Dorado all-flash storage, which is aimed at the enterprise business market which offers reliability and high performance.
Huawei Wi-Fi 6 AP is the industry’s first application of 8×8 MU-MIMO, OFDMA, and 1024 QAM. It offers transfer speeds of up to 10Gbps.
CloudEngine 16800 is a date centre switch with an embedded artificial intelligence (AI) chip. The AI chip enables the iLossless algorithm, improving data storage IOPS by 30%.
Huawei’s software-defined cameras feature algorithms that may be continually improved through software upgrades. These are suitable for a variety of security scenarios such as face checkpoint, situation awareness, vehicle checkpoint, and Intelligent Transportation Surveillance. “The growth from the numbers which we have updated is less important to us than the critical technology we have achieved in these different areas,” Du Min said. The full video interview with Alex Du is embedded below. This article was published in partnership with Huawei Enterprise.