Pam Golding International has launched a US citizenship via EB-5 investment programme. The property group said that while european residency programmes remain very popular among South Africans wishing to obtain a Schengen Visa and European residency, many have expressed a preference for the US should they one day want to relocate overseas, setting up a new life and businesses for themselves and their children. “As a result of this demand, we now offer access to the USA Immigrant Investor EB-5 programme which provides the opportunity to acquire US citizenship via investment in a commercial property venture,” said Chris Immelman, head of Pam Golding International. Created by US Congress in 1990 to stimulate the US economy through job creation and capital investment by foreign investors, EB-5 is currently the fastest way to obtain a US Green Card for your immediate family, including children under the age of 21. Applicants need to invest $500,000 (R7 million) in an eligible business that will create 10 jobs, and the Green Card is valid for 10 years. Should your application for a Green Card be refused, your investment is returned to you immediately. It usually takes 18-24 months from the time of your investment to obtain your US Green Card. Those qualifying for a Green Card via the EB-5 programme have the right to live, work, study or build a business anywhere in the USA, with access to the finest educational institutions, medical facilities and social programmes at the same cost a US citizen would pay, Immelman said. “However indications from the US government are that entry to this programme will increase to $1 million plus during 2019, so time is of the essence to take advantage of the more accessible window of opportunity via an investment of $500,000,” said Immelman. He said that this investment is kept in a secure US escrow account until your application is approved by the government, at which point it is transferred to the project. “Importantly, it also affords the opportunity to become a full US citizen after only five years of permanent residency. And, upon successful completion of the EB-5 project invested in, you receive the full return of the $500 000 invested. “All the above investment projects are overseen by a group of highly experienced professionals who take care of job creation and overall operation, so there is no need to actively participate in the management of the business.” Read: New UK border control measures will make life easier for traveling South Africans