Specialist recruitment firm Michael Page has published its latest salary survey, showing what skilled professionals in 180 different jobs in South Africa can expect to earn in 2019. According to the recruitment specialists, the South African labour market has once again experienced an unpredictable year. “Despite a short recovery observed in South Africa in the first half of 2018 and the emergence from a recession with a +2.2% GDP growth in the third quarter, the official unemployment rate is back at its 2017 level,” the group said. The country also faces weak investment and consumer confidence, along with continued limited household spending and private investment – though Michael Page said that it expects a positive economic impact on the GDP growth and the unemployment rate for 2019 due to various stimulus packages and investment drives. Outlook for South Africa’s job market sectors While the majority of sectors remain under pressure, positive development will come from the Banking & Financial Services, IT and Transportation sectors, Michael Page said. “As a result of limited household spending and private investment over the last 3 years, local and international organisations continue to be cautious when expanding into the African markets. Despite organisations’ reservations, our specialised Rest of Africa (RoA) recruitment teams have managed to improve year-on-year results by 63%. The RoA region has also created a significant demand for recruitment services in South Africa, with many head offices based mainly in Johannesburg or Cape Town,” it said. Salaries and bonuses have tended to follow a consistent pattern over the past 5 years, with steady increases to reflect inflationary pressures. “In the current market, there are a number of candidates with niche skill sets or relevant experience who are able to command higher salaries, due to a low supply of talent,” it said. The tables below outline the salary ranges and averages for South African professionals across all sectors. The averages represent annual salaries, in thousands of rands (R’000). Sectors marked with a * show the salary ranges for large companies. Finance and Accounting* Information Technology* Engineering and Manufacturing Procurement* Human Resources Legal Supply Chain and Logistics* Sales and Marketing (Consumer) Sales and Marketing (B2B) Read: This is the average salary in South Africa