President Cyril Ramaphosa hosted a Q&A session through his official Twitter account on Monday (15 April), discussing various election topics such as employment, transformation and service delivery. The president said he welcomed the opportunity to address questions raised by the people of South Africa, particularly the youth, and expressed interest in conducting more Q&As in the future. New research on voter motivations from the Centre for Social Development in Africa (CSDA) at the University of Johannesburg shows that Ramaphosa has emerged as the most important influence on voter support in the coming elections. Unlike the previous (2017) study, where party loyalty was not a predictor of voting behaviour, a significant shift has occurred since then. In 2018, party loyalty emerged as a predictor of voter choice, the researchers said. This was particularly noticeable among ANC supporters, where trust in the presidency has gone hand-in-hand with a boost in ANC loyalty. “It appears that trust in president Ramaphosa may have rekindled loyalty to the party that brought freedom and democracy to South Africa,” the researchers said. BusinessTech looked at some of the most notable questions and answers from the president below. What is the plan to put an end to xenophobia in South Africa? And why does it always happen around elections time? What measures will be put in place to ensure we reduce the youth unemployment rate and create an environment that encourages youth entrepreneurship? Why should unemployed graduates vote for the ANC? Should South Africa reconsider the death penalty given the rise of crime in South Africa? Should South Africa reduce the number of embassies it has to save on money? Why is the ANC playing the race card to win the elections? When is South Africa’s electoral system going digital and when will South Africa make programming compulsory in schools? What are the plans to speed up transformation in the workplace? Read: If I could, I would tie white South Africans to a tree and say don’t leave: Ramaphosa