If you plan to relocate so you can get your child into a particular school next year, now’s the time to do so, says Rudi Botha, CEO of bond originator BetterBond. Botha said that it currently takes between three and four months to sell most homes, and an average of three months to register the transfer of a new home. This means that parents should count on a six-month process to secure a new address in the feeder or catchment area of their chosen school, he said. “Since online applications in some provinces are already closed and most schools won’t consider even late applications or transfers after September, now’s the time to get going if you want to be able to apply in time for 2020 – or maybe even 2021.” Botha said that there are many South African parents who can’t afford to send their children to private schools, and others who don’t want to do that for various reasons, but who obviously still want their children to obtain the best education possible and, when it comes to high school, to do well in matric. “To try to ensure this, these parents will naturally concentrate their efforts on getting their children into those public schools that have built up a reputation for academic excellence, sporting tradition and great matric results – as parents do all over the world – with the result that many of these institutions receive thousands of applications a year, for just a few places available.” To solve this over-subscription problem, he said that many school governing bodies have written admission policies that give preference to applicants for whom the school is literally the nearest one to where they live, on a first-come-first-served basis. Proof of address is usually required, and the effect of this has often been to restrict the feeder area for each school to the same suburb or perhaps one or two immediately adjacent. “In addition, parents increasingly prefer to live close to the schools their children attend, in order to avoid traffic during the morning when dropping them off, and also to be within easy reach of after-school activities and weekend sports matches,” he said. “And this has all led to the evolution of property ‘hotspots’ around the most sought-after schools, where homes for sale are generally in short supply and prices generally show faster and higher growth than properties in the surrounding areas.” Below he outlined some of the most popular suburbs in every major city: Bloemfontein Universitas;
Westdene;
Waverley;
Brandwag. Cape Town Wynberg;
Newlands;
Rondebosch;
Rosebank;
Claremont;
Mowbray;
Kenilworth;
Bellville;
Durbanville. Centurion Die Hoewes;
Eldoraigne;
Zwartkop. Durban Glenwood;
Musgrave;
Westville;
Durban North;
Virginia;
Hillcrest. East London Stirling;
Selbourne;
Vincent. Johannesburg Parktown;
Parkview;
Greenside;
Victory Park;
Kensington;
Bedfordview;
Observatory. Port Elizabeth Walmer;
Summerstrand. Pretoria Waterkloof;
Lynnwood;
Brooklyn;
Arcadia;
Menlo Park;
Garsfontein. Botha says there are indications now that the feeder zones for government schools around the country could soon be extended to give more learners a chance to attend the most sought-after institutions. “This is certainly already the case in Gauteng, where it was recently announced by Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi,” he said. “However, while this will also be good for parents in that it will give them a bigger choice of suburbs in which to buy in order to access certain schools, and probably take some of the upward pressure off prices in the top ‘school suburbs’, we foresee that it is going to further boost the number of applications for entry to these schools, making it even more imperative to move home and apply as early as possible.” Read: Here’s what you need to know about Johannesburg’s new property rules