The World Economic Forum is preparing to host its annual meeting in the snowy Swiss resort city of Davos this week, with 56 delegates from South Africa registered to attend. It will be held from 22 January to 25 January, with the headline topic of 2019 being Globalization 4.0: Shaping a Global Architecture in the Age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Davos remains as popular as ever and is expected to host 3,000 people. The meeting will pick up on two major trends – the first being that is a fraught time for global co-operation, as legitimate frustration over the failure of globalisation to consistently raise living standards spills over into populism and nationalism. The second is drawing attention to the new wave of change that is crashing on us in the form of the high-tech digital revolution. “With climate change posing an existential threat to our common future, we need to figure out better ways to make the global economy work, and fast,” the WEF said. The theme will be explored over 350 sessions, nearly half of them webcast. The programme also focuses on six critical dialogues: Geopolitics in a multiconceptual world;
The future of the economy;
Industry systems and technology policy;
Risk resilience to promote systems thinking;
Human capital and society; and
Global institutional reform. 2019’s event will see some high profile names attending, including Sir David Attenborough, Shinzo Abe, Angela Merkel, Prince William and Jacinda Ardern. The South African delegation in 2019 will be led by president Cyril Ramaphosa, who said he will be using the meeting as an opportunity to punt South Africa as an ideal investment destination. Ramaphosa will be joined by several other government officials, representatives from South Africa’s big business sectors, as well as various development agencies. Included in the delegation is the WEF’s youngest participant – at just 16, South African wildlife photographer Skye Meaker. Reports have pegged the total cost of attending the meeting anywhere between $20,000 to over $50,000 per delegate, with the price of a ticket to the meeting around $27,000 alone. Those invited to the conference do not have to pay the ticket fee (which includes government officials and other high-profile leaders), but most businesses have to pay their own way. The tables below outline all 56 delegates that registered to attend the conference this week. Government  State-owned groups  Banking and Finance  Business and Development  Media and Other  Read: No plans to interfere with Reserve Bank independence: Ramaphosa