South Africans are increasingly turning to used cars over newer models, according to a recent report by Wesbank, which notes that consumer demand appears to remain robust across the country. “Considering WesBank application data, consumers are clearly keen to buy cars,” said Ghana Msibi, WesBank executive head of Sales and Marketing. “However, a lot of that demand has shifted to the used car market (69% of all applications were for used cars), indicative of the stress in the new car market as well as the worsening household situation with regard to disposable income and general affordability.” WesBank data also shows that consumers are holding onto their cars for longer, combatting South African motorists’ affordability challenge. “While consumers have consistently financed their cars near the maximum period allowed for the past two years, the average period before settlement of those contracts has increased by six months,” said Msibi. This shift towards used vehicles may lead to another tough year for new car sales in South Africa. However a number of new and returning models may tempt motorists into splurging on a 2019 model. Below BusinessTech looked at eight of the most anticipated cars coming to South Africa in 2019 Audi Q8  Audi’s new Q8 SUV is expected to combine the elegance of a four-door luxury coupé with the practical versatility of a large SUV. Audi said that the SUV coupe will be wider, shorter and lower than its Q7 sister model but will offer a spacious interior that beats its direct competitors in most relevant dimensions. BMW 3 Series  First announced at the Paris Motor Show in October, the 2019 3 series features a similar design to past models but is 85 millimetres longer than its predecessor (at 4,709mm), 16 millimetres wider (1,827mm) and just 1 mm taller (1,442 millimetres). The instrument panel has a modern, light look with horizontal lines, high-quality electroplated trim strips and contours that extend into the doors. The start/stop button for the engine is now positioned in a control panel in the centre console that houses the gearshift lever or newly designed selector lever, the iDrive controller, electromechanical parking brake and the buttons for the driving experience control switch unit. Ford Ranger Raptor  Measuring 1.87 metres tall (up 52mm), 2.18 metres wide (331mm wider) and 5.39 metres long (30mm longer), the Raptor raises its ground clearance to 283mm, 46mm higher than regular Rangers. Under the bonnet is a 2.0-litre bi-turbo diesel engine making 157kW of power and 500Nm of torque. Porsche 911