South African higher education institution, Milpark Education, recently achieved international accreditation for its contact and online MBA from the Association of MBAs (AMBA). This is the only AMBA accredited online MBA in Africa and is the only African MBA with international accreditation for both contact and online distance learning, the group said. Milpark Education is one of the six top South African private higher education brands that make up STADIO Multiversity (a former subsidiary of private education group, Curro). Other institutions in the group’s stable are AFDA, the Embury Institute for Higher Education, LISOF, Southern Business School (SBS) and Prestige Academy. “Milpark Education is making considerable strides in higher education,” said Dr Cobus Oosthuizen, dean for Milpark Business School. “We recently had our first Doctoral Degree accredited, the Doctorate in Business Administration, and the AMBA recognition is another milestone to celebrate, especially because of the importance graduates and the industry place on international accreditation.” Course The MBA course is a multidisciplinary programme with a practical orientation that provides managers, professionals and graduates with advanced management and business leadership education. “Southern Africa has a need for managers and business leaders who can conduct business responsibly and successfully, not only locally but also in the global marketplace,” the school said. The minimum duration for the course is two years, and applicants are expected to have access to reliable broadband internet access in addition to meeting the traditional application requirements. Modules currently available in the online MBA programme include: Business report writing, quantitative analysis, and presentation skills;
General management environment;
Business ethics and corporate governance;
Social responsibility and environmental management;
People management; and
Operations and technology management. According to the course’s pricing schedule, the estimated cost of the distance learning programme is R310,670, which is the same price as the part-time contact learning course. Read: MBA graduates are doubling their salaries – these are the top business schools in the world