JSE-listed education group Curro is launching Curro Holdings: Private College – Rivonia, its first educational facility to offer the National Certificate Vocational (NCV) as an alternative to the National Senior Certificate. With classes starting on 4 February 2019, it will offer two NCV programmes: Information Technology and Computer Sciences, and Finance, Economics and Accounting. Stoffel Goosen, head: organisational development at Curro, said that the NCV qualification has existed since 2008 and is available through public and private colleges registered with the Department of Higher Education. It is accredited by Umalusi. To date, however, the qualification has generally been offered at facilities targeting post-matric-aged students. “The NCV can actually be an alternative option for high-school learners who want to specialise in a field of interest from school-going age,” he said. “Leaners who have completed Grade 9 can enter the NCV at Level 2, and the NCV levels 2, 3 and 4 run parallel to grades 10, 11 and 12. An NCV Level 4 qualification is on the same level as a matric qualification.” “We hope that we will be able to grow our NCV offering into additional fields of study – there are 18 NCV ‘sub-field’ options available in total, such as Hospitality, Drawing Office Practice, Mechatronics and Tourism, among others – and additional locations,” Goosen said. He said that there is a misconception that the NCV is an “easy” option in comparison to the NSC. “Rather, the focus is on practical, vocational training in addition to core academic subjects – Language, Mathematics/Mathematical Literacy and Life Orientation. The NCV enables students to select a career path in vocational fields,” he said. “The qualification ensures they are skilled and employable, but also allows them to study further in their field of interest, either at an FET college or at a Higher Education institution, such a as a university or university of technology.” Additional information about Curro Holdings Ltd: Private College – Rivonia: Curro Holdings Ltd: Private College – Rivonia will be a co-ed, English-medium facility. The practical nature of the NCV courses require a longer school day, so classes will run from 8am until 5pm, although Goosen noted that there will be support staff available from 6.30am to 6.30pm to provide learners access to the classrooms and technology. “We have taken working parents into consideration and geared the school day towards convenience – parents can drop off and fetch their children, while still working normal office hours and without incurring additional costs for aftercare facilities,” he said. “The school day will not just include the academic and vocational subjects, however. It will also include practical sessions, social time and physical activity. We want to ensure a balanced approach. Learners will also not have homework – everything they need to do will be accomplished during the school day.” An hour’s lunch break is included in the school day, along with a prepared meal, which will also help parents to keep extra school costs and preparation time to a minimum, and ensure all learners have access to a balanced diet. Read: Curro launches new school with specialised courses in robotics and coding