The department of basic education will release the class of 2018’s National Senior Certificate matric results on 4 January 2019. Umalusi, the council for quality assurance in general and further education and training, has officially approved the results with no systemic irregularities reported. The class of 2018 was the eleventh Grade 12 cohort to write the NSC examinations but only the fifth cohort to write final examinations under the Curriculum Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS). More significantly, the class of 2018 was the first Grade 12 cohort to be assessed on the following 12 newly introduced subjects: South African Sign Language Home Language;
Technical Mathematics;
Technical Sciences;
Mechanical Technology (Automotive, Fitting and Machining, Welding and Metal Work);
Civil Technology (Civil Services, Construction, Woodworking);
Electrical Technology (Digital Systems, Electronics, Power Systems). The Independent Examination Board (IEB) Exam results will be available a day earlier at 00:01 on 3 January 2019. The IEB offers examinations for various client schools across South Africa – mostly private schools. How to get your results Learners can access their results (or register to receive them) in the following ways: Learners can access their results directly by logging onto the Department of Basic Education’s website here. Alternatively, students who took the IEB examinations can access their results from the IEB website here. A number of online news websites will publish the results – including News24’s Matric Results page. Learners who do not have internet access will be able to obtain their results from a number of South Africa’s daily newspapers, however, you will not be able to see individual subject results. Learners may obtain their results directly from the schools or learning facilities at which the exams were written. The SABC in conjunction with the Department of Education will allow learners to obtain results on their phones in a number of ways.

Learners can download the MatricsMate app directly from their phone’s app store.
Alternatively, learners can sign up to the SABC’s SMS service: SMS the learner’s ID and Student number to 35658 or dial *120*35658# to register. The SMS will tell learners if they have passed or not, while the USSD system (*120*35658#) will deliver the more detailed results. You can also contact the Department of Education directly by dialling 082 152 to receive your matric results. Read: The average age of a South African home buyer is going up