Cape Town and London-based public transport data and technology company, WhereIsMyTransport, has secured an additional $1.85 (R25.6 million) in funding from investors. WhereIsMyTransport is a public transport data and technology company incorporated in the UK that connects and collects data in emerging cities, integrating this information on its open data platform. Its products are used by cities to coordinate and monitor services, communicate directly with citizens, and to evaluate investment; by operators to integrate their systems and optimise service; and by passengers, who can access the platform through apps and endpoints connected to the WhereIsMyTransport platform. Originally founded in South Africa, the group has announced that it has received further investment from Liil Ventures and Goodwell Investments as part of its Series A funding round. In 2017, the group secured seed funding of R20 million, after receiving an investment of £1.165 million in August 2016. The latest round of investment has been secured as the company expands its digital mapping of formal and informally run public transport networks into new emerging markets, including its first data collection projects in India and Latin America. “Poor mobility in emerging markets is a huge social issue that has been overlooked for years. WhereIsMyTransport’s data and technology has a direct and sustainable positive impact on the livelihood of hundreds of millions of excluded households in these markets,” said Wim van der Beek, founder and managing partner at returning investor, Goodwell Investments. “WhereIsMyTransport and its solutions are perfectly aligned with our investment strategy, and we are thrilled to continue to support the company and its mission for social change,” he said. Data for more than 30 major cities in emerging markets are now available on the WhereIsMyTransport integrated mobility data platform – an open API for mobility data and commuter services.  Read: SA road mapping startup secures R20 million in funding