The Western Cape is set to introduce new traffic laws in an effort to curb unroadworthy vehicles on the province’s roads. In an interview with 702, Transport MEC in Western Cape, Donald Grant, said that his the legislation should be drafted by 15 February. “It is going to have wider powers and bigger consequences (than the current laws),” he said. The first Traffic Amendment Bill dealt with three basic things: Impoundment of taxis without operating licenses;
Safety of cyclists;
Blue lights. “So now it is time to make sure that it is widened to be more effective so that it deals with impoundments not only of taxis but of all vehicles travelling on our roads,” he said. He added that this change would allow them to not only impound taxis, but other vehicles such as sedans as well. Grant said that his department would also be lobbying the Justice Cluster to implement greater consequences for motorists who exceed the speed limit. “At the moment we are arresting people going at 151km/h in a 120km/h zone then we have powers of arrest and to take them to court for prosecution. “(As) the Justice Cluster sets the bar on consequences, we’ve got to lobby them for far greater sentencing for motorists that endanger the lives of others.” Speeding incident Speeding in Cape Town was placed under the spotlight again this week after a video showing a high-speed crash on the N1 outgoing at the Sable Road off-ramp went viral. The City of Cape Town confirmed that the incident occurred just after midnight on Monday morning (21 January) and that the driver of the vehicle was seriously injured. “The incident is just the latest example of the devastation wrought by illegal street racers on our streets,” it said in a statement. “What is equally concerning is the group of people gathered on the overpass who were filming the incident.” However, the City said it was somewhat hamstrung in pursuing the matter further. “The Traffic Service is unable to prosecute motorists on the strength of third-party evidence such as the video footage that is being circulated,” it said. “However, the South African Police Service is able to pursue a case and we hope that they will do so in this instance. “The City has engaged with the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) about this matter and they have informed us that they are not legally able to open cases or issue notices based on statements from members of the public and that only SAPS may investigate such cases when a member of the public submits a complaint.” Read: E-toll alternative could pay for South Africa’s roads: Sanral