Jobs website, Glassdoor, has released a new report looking at the perfect CV. The CV is based on collected advice provided by recruitment experts and has been collated into a handy infographic to give you an easy-to-follow outline for a resume. You can find a detailed explanation of each point below.  1. Design Matters: Don’t go overboard with intricately decorated templates. Look for sufficient white space, margins of at least .7 inches (approximately 1.7 centimetres), and a font size no smaller than 11 pt. 2. Be Reachable: Make it easy for recruiters to reach out to you by providing your contact info near the header. 3. Show Off Your Skills: Don’t make recruiters hunt for the most critical information on your resume – include a table of your key soft and hard skill sets up top. Make sure your highlighted skills show why you’re a good fit for the job — all the better if these are keywords from the job description. 4. List Your Experience: This section should include each company you’ve worked for, your title, the dates you worked there, and several bullet points that describe your key accomplishments and responsibilities. 5. Quantify Your Experience: Whenever you can use concrete data points — it helps provide recruiters with the scope and context of your work and demonstrates how you contributed to the bottom line. 6. Include Other Positions: Don’t be afraid to include positions that aren’t directly related to the one you’re applying for, especially if you have limited work experience. You can still use it to demonstrate the skills and qualities you want to be highlighted. 7. Get the Grade: Many jobs require degrees or certifications, so make sure to list yours. GPA (school grades) are optional but may be worth including if you’ve graduated recently with high marks. 8. The Extra Stuff: Add some colour to your resume with a short catch-all ‘Additional Experience’ section at the end. Include clubs/organizations, volunteer experience, awards you’ve won, and even interesting hobbies or activities. 9. Keep It Concise: Limit your resume to 1-2 pages at the most. Read: Big influx of CCMA cases expected due to new minimum wage