Our planet is equal parts terrifying and terrific. Watching documentaries is one of the best ways to learn more about what makes life on earth tick. From life on death row to interactions with wildlife and nature, these are some of the fascinating documentaries on Showmax that you can watch to learn more about life on earth.   Every day police officers put their lives on the line to protect their communities. Unfortunately, this sometimes results in the death of these public servants. Fallen looks at the ultimate sacrifice that many police officers make. Watch now »   Life & Death Row gives viewers a window into the harrowing world of life and death in the justice system. From profiling prisoners on death row to the struggle between guilt and innocence in the courts, this series touches on sensitive topics that many try to ignore. Watch now »   Hurricanes are one of the most destructive natural forces on the planet. This documentary takes you into the eye of the storm as it forms off the coast of Africa, then tears across the Atlantic to ravage the Caribbean islands. Watch now »   The long-awaited sequel to the award-winning BBC Earth series, One Amazing Day tracks a single day in various fascinating environments. Watch in startling HD how nature reacts to the daily changes it faces, and experience some of the most incredible animal encounters possible. Watch now »   A renowned guitarist and his son return to Cuba to create an album alongside the country’s most talented musicians. Learn these artists’ stories and hear their music as they take you on a journey of sound. Watch now »   Stand-up comic Kumail Nanjiani is a man easily frightened. One place that he seems to be comfortable, however, is on stage, so what better place to discuss his fears than in an hour-long comedy special? Forget your worries and laugh at this comedian as he complains about his strange hang-ups. Watch now »   Roy Wood Jr. takes on every topic you could think of in this wildly entertaining comedy special. From freeway protests, to racist flags, to the origin of blues music – nothing is off limits to Roy. Watch now »   Natasha Leggero isn’t afraid to give you a piece of her mind. She is willing to take on anyone: from conservative Republicans to Burning Man; from hipsters to judgey moms – Natasha hilariously breaks down her issues with a wide variety of people. Watch now » This article was published in partnership with Showmax.