The next two decades promise a full-scale revolution in our working lives, according to Stephane Kasriel, CEO of Upwork, who says that robots are already performing many jobs previously occupied by humans. However, the idea that these jobs will replace large swathes of the world’s working population is proving to be incorrect. In a post for the World Economic Forum, Kasriel noted that while the number of robots at work reached record levels in 2018, the global unemployment level fell to 5.2% in December – the lowest level in 38 years. “In other words, high tech and high employment don’t have to be mutually exclusive. We’re living the proof of that today,” he said. “Given this synchronicity between employment and tech, I believe there are reasons to be hopeful that jobs will become more accessible, more flexible and more liberating over the next two decades.” Below Kasriel outlined five significant changes which come into place as technology becomes more prolific: AI and robotics will ultimately create more work, not less. Much like today. There won’t be a shortage of jobs but – if we don’t take the right steps – a shortage of skilled talent to fill those jobs. As remote work becomes the norm, cities will enter the talent wars of the future. Untethering work from place is going to give people new geographic freedom to live where they want, and cities and metropolitan regions will compete to attract this new mobile labour force. The majority of the workforce will freelance by 2027, based on workforce growth rates found in Freelancing in America 2017. Technological change will keep increasing, so learning new skills will be an ongoing necessity throughout life. Rethinking education While new technology should ultimately prove to be positive for the world’s workforce, Kasriel said that fast technological change means that the people operating constantly evolving machines need to learn new skills – and quickly. “Our current education system adapts to change too slowly and operates too ineffectively for this new world,” he said. “We need to build an education system for lifelong learning – and a culture that promotes it. Rewiring the system should begin with pre-kindergarten, which should be free and compulsory, while education should remain similarly accessible throughout someone’s working life.” Kasriel added that it will ultimately be skills – not college pedigree – that will matter most for the future workforce. “Furthermore, our education system needs to equip people with skills that machines aren’t good at (yet). This means meta-skills such as entrepreneurship, teamwork, curiosity and adaptability. “As government adapts at all levels to a changing workforce, businesses, too, must shoulder some of the load. And, like government, businesses needs to invest both in the workforces they have today and the one they will need tomorrow. “That means they need to spend more resources training new workers for job openings and to invest more in up-skilling their current employees,” he said. Below are the technologies most likely to be adopted by companies around the world by the year 2022:  Read: How schools can prepare students for jobs that don’t exist yet