Eskom has announced that stage 2 load shedding will continue throughout Saturday, expected to end at 23h00. The rotational blackouts come as a result of a shortage of capacity with a number of generating units still out of service due to breakdowns. “Load shedding is required all day today to cater for further trips and to create capacity to replenish water reserves for our pumped storage schemes. Eskom will communicate if there is a change in the system during the day,” Eskom said. “We have made some progress in reducing the unplanned breakdowns from above 12,000MW yesterday to 11,000MW as at 07h00 this morning. There is also an improvement in managing coal handling with regard to wet coal, with only one station experiencing coal-handling problems, as a result of the incessant rains. “We continue to utilise diesel and water resources at our open cycle gas turbines and pumped storage schemes respectively, to supplement capacity,” it said. Power customers have been asked to reduce demand as a concerted collective effort can help to avoid or decrease the level of load shedding. “As we are experiencing rainy and cooler weather conditions in some parts of the country, we ask that you use efficient heating to keep warm and switch off your geysers over peak periods.” Load shedding schedules Customers can find their various load shedding schedules on their local metro or municipal websites, where applicable, or from Eskom directly. For those living in South Africa’s major metros, here is where you can check to see when you will be hit: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Vodacom warns of service loss due to Eskom load shedding 