FNB Connect will now offer the newly introduced and first-ever made-in-South Africa, Mara Phones – the Mara X and Mara Z. FNB customers will also get the deals available on the FNB Connect online shop, from 23 December 2019, payable over 24 months. Devices are paired with an FNB Connect SIM, on a Top Up Lifestyle plan, that includes monthly data, voice minutes and SMS allocations on a 2-year contract and come fully integrated into FNB’s digital platforms where customers can view balances and buy more bundles if and when necessary. These are the deals available: Mara X, Top Up XS (100MB, 30mins, 30SMS) + Once-off 1 GB data bundle @ R159 per month.
Mara Z, Top Up M (400M, 100mins, 100 SMS) + Once-off 2 GB data bundle @ R239 per month. In addition, FNB customers also receive Free Connect monthly data, voice minutes and SMSs, subject to their FNB transactional account type and qualifying criteria. Customers could also earn up to 15% back in eBucks on their Connect monthly spend. Mara in South Afirca During South Africa’s inaugural Africa Investment Forum in November last year, Mara founder and Chief Executive Officer, Ashish Thakkar, 38, announced that his company would invest R1.5 billion in a South African business venture over the next five years. Almost 11 months later, the Rwanda-based Mara group has made good on its promise, with the announcement of a plant to build the phones opening in South Africa. The modern state-of-the-art plant, with an annual production capacity of over 1.2 million handsets, manufactures the Mara X and Mara Z. The company plans to launch upgraded versions annually. The venture will generate hundreds of high-skilled direct jobs and thousands of indirect jobs. It will contribute to the transfer of technology and high-tech knowledge in South Africa. The production is expected to serve the domestic market as well as the regional market, especially the SADC region, contributing to strategies that position South Africa as the gateway to Africa. The phones are already being sold through various partnerships, including with local banks like Nedbank and operators like Vodacom. Read: South Africa opens new phone manufacturing plant 