A growing number of Capetonians are buying properties to rent out to tourists over the busy holiday season. Holiday rentals are now an essential element of most coastal property markets, especially Cape Town, says Ross Levin, managing director for Seeff Atlantic Seaboard and City Bowl. “With direct flights from just about anywhere in the world including New York to Cape Town and visa reforms, we hope for a good holiday rentals season. “What’s more, rental rates have remained fairly flat. SA also still offers a more affordable lifestyle compared to most European, Asian and North American countries and you can enjoy a quality holiday with restaurants and other entertainment for much less than if you were travelling abroad.” Levin said that Cape Town expects the lion’s share of visitors and is regarded as the busiest tourist city in Africa with a season that runs from November to April annually as well as over the school holidays. He said that foreigners also flock to the Cape over the summer with some spending as much as 4-6 months here to escape the cold European winter. He said that the hot spots for holiday rentals include: Atlantic Seaboard/City Bowl Aside from two top Blue Flag beaches, Clifton and Camps Bay, there’s a host of street cafés and restaurants lining the beaches, from Clifton to the Camps Bay Promenade and onto Mouille Point and the Waterfront as well as in Sea Point, Green Point and the CBD. Attractions include the Waterfront and Silo District for 5-star dining and shopping, a ride on the Wheel of Excellence for great city and Table Mountain views, a visit to the Aquarium and Zeitz MOCAA Museum or helicopter flips, yacht or boat trips. Rates: Apartments in CBD, Sea Point and Green Point range from R1,000-R3,000/day and luxury waterfront/seafront units from R15,000-R20,000/day. Clifton, Bantry Bay, Fresnaye and Camps Bay luxury villas range from R60,000-R80,000 to as much as R160,000/day. Hout Bay/Llandudno The picture-perfect old harbour lined with fishing boats, Mariner’s Wharf and the famous Snoekies makes Hout Bay a hot spot for holiday rentals. Neighbouring Llandudno offers villas and a Blue Flag beach. You can also enjoy some of the most scenic drives and cycling and hiking trails in the world (Victoria Road and Chapman’s Peak). Rates: R2,000-R8,000/night to around R40,000/night for a luxury home/villa. Strand and Gordons Bay Strand is famous for its promenade lined with restaurants, a 5km white sandy beach for water sport and fishing, waterpark and put-put for children and Olympic-sized swimming pool. Neighbouring Gordons Bay boasts the famous Blue Flag Bikini Beach and a yacht-lined bay as well as Clarence Drive, a world-class scenic drive or cycle route between Gordon’s Bay and Betty’s Bay. Rates: From R800-R3000/night for beach apartments depending on location and finishes. Blouberg to Melkbosstrand The best views of Table Mountain and Robben Island, kilometres of white sandy beaches and one of the best kite surfing areas in the world draws scores of holidaymakers each year, says Nancy Oeschger, rentals manager for Seeff Blouberg. Visitors are spoilt for choice with apartments and estates lining the beach area. Facilities are outstanding and include tops class restaurants that look out over the ocean such as Damhuis Restaurant (Melkbosstrand), the Eden on the Bay and Seaside Village centres, Blowfish, Ons Huisie and On the Rocks restaurants among many others. Rates: From R800-R3,000/night for beach apartments. Muizenberg/Kalk Bay/Fish Hoek and the False Bay Coast From Muizenberg and Kalk Bay to Fish Hoek and Simons Town, holiday makers are spoilt for choice with top beaches, restaurants and other tourist attractions. Muizenberg is a Blue Flag beach and one of the best surfing spots. Surfer’s Corner is a landmark along with the colourful huts on St James’ beach and Live Bait and Harbour House for the best seafood. Rates: R1,900 -R3,000/night for beach apartments in Muizenberg. Stellenbosch/Franschhoek/Tulbagh No visit to the Cape is complete without a visit to the wine farms, says Marinda Uys, rentals manager for Seeff. With over 200 wineries, it is all about food, wine, architecture and the great outdoors. Stellenbosch and Tulbagh offer fabulous Cape Dutch heritage architecture. Franschhoek Village offers some of the best restaurants and art stores and most wine farms offer a choice of top restaurants. The Franschhoek Wine Tram offers a hop on hop off tour to enjoy the best of the valley. Golf lovers can head to De Zalze, Stellenbosch Golf Club, Boschenmeer and Pearl Valley/Val de Vie. Rates: R1,500-R5,500/night depending on location and accommodation. Hermanus/Pringle Bay area A fabulous beach holiday and some of the best whale watching and water-based activities, not to forget a trip to the Hemel en Aarde Wine Valley await visitors here, says Paul Kruger, licensee for Seeff Hermanus. John du Toit from Pringle Bay says that the area falls in the Kogelberg Biosphere and is ideal for nature lovers, offering an incredible range of bird and sea life. The scenic R44 Clarence Drive, which meanders through Rooi Els, Pringle Bay, Betty’s Bay and Kleinmond offers magnificent views across False Bay. A round of golf at the nearby Arabella Hotel and Golf Estate is not to be missed. Rates: R1,500-R6,500/night depending on the location and accommodation. Read: Cape Town approves new Airbnb by-law 