cnMatrix, with its customised and flexible wireless-aware support, is designed to easily and cost-effectively administer a unified wired and wireless network. Distributed by Duxbury Networking, this portfolio of cloud-managed, enterprise-grade, Layer-2/Layer-3 Ethernet switches, helps to reduce the cost of ownership and flatten the learning curve, by automating many of the interactions with connected wireless devices. Click here to find out more about cnMatrix switches from Duxbury Networking. When working in tandem, cnMatrix switches and Cambium Networks’ cnPilot wireless indoor and outdoor access points, provide unique features, enhanced capabilities and automated switch configuration. Together they enable a simple, easy-to-use cloud managed unified wired-wireless access solution that improves the security posture of the network. No manual configuration is required on cnMatrix, resulting in hands-free, zero-touch wireless connectivity. The Policy Based Automation (PBA) functionality on the upstream cnMatrix can also be used to support zero-touch configuration for any wireless device. General device characteristics can be specified as well to facilitate automated detection of devices from any vendor. PBA device detection capabilities are easy to use and flexible. The switch leverages several mechanisms to learn about connecting devices, including Link Layer Discovery Protocol (802.1ab LLDP) data and MAC addresses. All automated configuration settings are dynamic and are instantly cleared once the device to which they are applied is no longer present. The cnMatrix series of fully managed switches delivers power savings with several models offering fanless operation. The switches offer flexibility with 4 SFP+ (10Gbps) uplinks on the 28 port models while offering 2 SFP (1 Gbps) uplinks on the 10 port models. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za  This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.