The Presidential Cabinet Committee on Eskom will brief president Cyril Ramaphosa on a daily basis on progress made to resolve the challenges at Eskom, which has managed to avert load shedding over the past two days, following a week of planned outages. “This committee will deal with matters of Eskom daily and deliver daily reports to the President on what actions need to be taken to secure energy supply,” said Cabinet in a statement on Friday. This as president Ramaphosa announced the appointment of a Special Cabinet Committee on Eskom to be led by deputy president David Mabuza in Parliament on Thursday. The committee comprises the Ministers of Public Enterprises, Energy, Finance, Transport, Intelligence and Police. Split As part of his state of the nation address earlier this month, Ramaphosa said that government will initiate a plan to split Eskom’s business into three separate entities. The business will focus on generation, transmission and distribution, he said. The idea has been rejected by trade unions, who believe the change is the first step towards privatising the power utility, and will lead to job losses. South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) general secretary Zwelinzima Vavi called the move a “declaration of war” and said they plan to retaliate by protesting in parliament during finance minister Tito Mboweni’s budget speech in February. Saftu said it would initiate a national shutdown in March, to protest the unbundling plan. Cosatu added that unions would be willing to negotiate with the government on Eskom, but it would not accept any move towards privatisation of the power utility or any job losses. “This is their mess, they can unbundle five times if they want to but no job should be lost even if it means they have to reskill the workers, they should do that,”  said Cosatu spokesperson Sizwe Pamla. The rand meanwhile, was back on its perch as the world’s most volatile currency as investors priced in the risk of a credit-rating downgrade while awaiting details of the government’s rescue plan for Eskom.