President Cyril Ramaphosa will deliver his second state of the nation address (SONA) on Thursday at 19h00 in Cape Town. During an election year, two SONAs are held – one in February (to mark the final session of the outgoing parliament) and another after the new parliament has been constituted. The purpose of the address is to highlight the achievements and challenges experienced over the past year and presents the executive’s programme for the year ahead. It covers political, economic and social matters, and considers the general state of the country. It also reflects on South Africa’s domestic affairs as well as its relations in Africa and abroad. Ramaphosa is expected to address many of the lingering concerns at present – around land reform, state owned enterprises, the creeping economy and unemployment – and will have to face a debate on his speech in the week that follows. Many are expecting decisive action on Eskom, where Ramaphosa has promised to detail plans to split the struggling power utility. The 2019 SONA marks Ramaphosa’s first ‘real’ address, away from the infighting and political manoeuvring that marred the 2018 speech, which was delayed as the ANC fought to get former president Jacob Zuma to resign. SONAs in the past, particularly under Zuma, often devolved into shouting matches and even violence, with disruptions from the EFF, and private security on the floor – a stark contrast to the air of elegance portrayed by politicians on the red carpet outside. Analysts expect a quieter, more dignified address under Ramaphosa – but the EFF has threatened to again disrupt proceedings unless the president addresses his links to Bosasa. SONA schedule The SONA schedule runs all day, starting with the Morning Live Show from 07h00. Proceedings are expected to conclude at around 21h00. The SONA has been criticised in the past for wasting money on pomp and extravagance at a time when the country should be cutting all extra costs. However, in 2019, Ramaphosa has halved the budget, doing away with the gala dinner. Despite this, it remains a red carpet event. This is the schedule: From 07h00 on 7 February 2019 – SONA 2019 Morning Live Show
From 15h00 on 7 February 2019 – SONA 2019 Red Carpet Live Show
From 19h00 on 7 February 2019 – State of the Nation Address by the President of the Republic of South Africa This is where you can watch it: Parliament TV
eNCA
SABC You can also watch the address on SABC2 from 18h00, as well as on eNCA’s news channel on DStv channel 403. The red carpet walks and address can be live-streamed through parliament’s YouTube channel, embedded below: Parliament TV  eNCA livestream  SABC livestream  For those living in Cape Town, getting around may be more difficult during the day’s festivities due to road closures. Below is a list of all road closures and the times they will be closed, to help you plan routes: Below is a list of the roads that will be closed: 18h00 to 19h00 Roeland Street: between Buitenkant and Brandweer Streets 17h45 to 19h00 (Temporary Closure ±35 minutes) Klipper Road, Newlands: from Main Road (M4) to Newlands Avenue
Princess Anne Avenue, Newlands: from Newlands Avenue to Union Avenue
Newlands Avenue, Newlands: from Dean Street to Princess Anne Avenue
Dean Street, Newlands, westbound: from Main Road (M4) to Newlands Avenue
M3, Union Avenue, Rhodes Drive, Philip Kgosana Drive (De Waal Drive), Roeland Street, City-bound carriageway: from Newlands Avenue to city centre
Woolsack Drive, Rondebosch, westbound: between Main Road (M4) and Rhodes Drive (M3)
Anzio Road, Observatory: from Main Road (M4) to Philip Kgosana Drive (De Waal Drive) (M3)
N2, Settlers Way City-bound carriageway: from Main Road (M4) to city centre 17h00 to 20h00 Buitenkant Street: between Darling and Strand Streets
Darling Street: between Buitenkant and Canterbury Streets
Harrington Street: between Darling and Roeland Streets 06h00 to 23h45 Church Sqaure
Roeland Street: between Plein and Buitenkant Streets
Closure of Company Gardens
Government Avenue from Orange Street to Wale Street
Plein Street from Longmarket Street to Roeland Street
St John’s Street from Roeland Street to Vrede Street
Gallery Lane
Bouquet Street
Hope Street: between Roeland and Glynn Streets
Wesley Street: between Buitenkant and Hope Streets
Glynn Street: between Buitenkant and Hope Streets
Wale Street: between Queen Victoria and Adderley Streets
Bureau Street: between Adderley and Parliament Streets
Spin and Mostert Streets: between Corporation and Parliament Streets
Parliament Street from the gates of Parliament to Longmarket Street
Commercial Street: between Plein and Buitenkant Streets – becomes bi-directional
Wesley and Glynn Streets: between Hope and Buitenkant Streets – becomes bi-directional Read: Government cuts SONA budget in half