The ANC has accused Germany, the UK, the USA, the Netherlands and Switzerland of trying to influence South Africa’s upcoming elections by sending communications directly to the president of the country. The party was reacting to weekend reports that the aforementioned countries had sent a letter to president Cyril Ramaphosa, warning him that failure to take action on corruption in the country would hamper his bid to draw foreign investment to the country. A joint statement by the embassies of the countries clarified that it was not a letter sent to Ramaphosa, but rather a memo of discussion points that were part of the president’s investment drive in 2018. Despite this, the Department of International Relations and Cooperation accused the countries of flouting South Africa’s diplomatic processes, for which they apologised. However, while the government appears to have resolved the issue, the ANC has issued a statement in which it interprets the matter as a threat from the foreign governments, calling them “imperialist forces” that have a “holier-than-though” stance on corruption. The party said the message from the five countries was alarmist, dramatic and had a threatening and bullying tone – and went further to accuse the countries of trying to capture the state. The five countries have over R1 trillion invested in South Africa. The ANC’s full response is copied below: Both government and the ANC’s reaction to the memo has been to focus on the manner in which the message was delivered, with no mention of the contents of the document. According to the Sunday Times report, the memo said that there should be a ‘clear, unqualified and manifest political commitment to the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary and to honest and ethical business practices’. The five countries said that they were concerned about the challenges of foreign investment, referring to the ‘constant changes of the goalposts’ in the regulatory framework for mining, BEE targets and intellectual property rights. The countries also called for a change in South Africa’s current visa practices. South Africa has gained international attention in recent years due to the breaking of several high-profile corruption scandals, which has not been limited to the widely-reported Gupta state capture saga. In recent weeks, damning testimony by former Bosasa executives have brought to light the extent to which government officials have been implicated in bribery and corruption, spreading across almost every state department. While South Africa has set up several commissions of inquiry into the widely reported corruption within government, no high profile arrests have been made, and none of the implicated parties, who have been identified as core to the entire saga, have been brought to book. Read: Germany, the UK, and the USA have sent an ‘unprecedented’ letter to Ramaphosa – here’s what it said