Western Cape Transport MEC, Donald Grant, presented the province’s festive season statistics this past week. Grant said this his past festive season saw a 6% decrease in overall fatalities (down from 262 to 246). In addition, a notable decrease was recorded in pedestrian deaths (down from 104 to 91). “Festive season periods are always the busiest time on our roads, with thousands of vehicles making trips in and out of the province, towards their various holiday destinations. Increased vehicle numbers were recorded along the main routes and at various checkpoints,” he said. “This past festive season (1 December 2018 to 31 January 2019) was markedly different as for the first time, a full complement of smart enforcement technologies were deployed across the province to bolster our efforts of increasing compliance and saving more lives on our roads.” According to Grant, these Smart Enforcement Technology interventions include: Handheld devices which have enabled officials to have direct roadside access to verify the validity of driving and motor vehicle licences, professional driving permits, speeding offences at all our Average Speed Over Distance sites across our province (with 490 Provincial Traffic and 40 trainee traffic officer students trained in the use of these devices); New vehicles fitted with automatic number plate recognition software dashcams. Other new in-vehicle technology includes live camera surveillance, new patrol radios, vehicle tracking, and stolen vehicle monitoring. Average Speed Over Distance (ASOD) camera enforcement technology. This technology now covers over 450 km of the province’s busiest roads  and calculates the average speed of a vehicle travelling from one ASOD station to the next. Technological advancement to monitor drivers as part of a Fatigue Management Awareness Programme targeted at drivers travelling long distances. This intervention is primarily aimed at ensuring that the driver of a public transport vehicle has a total maximum of 15 hours driving time in a period of 24 hours, and a minimum continuous resting period of 8 hours within a 24-hour period. Three Mobile Alcohol Evidentiary Units deployed at strategic locations across the province to aid our successful Random Breath Testing (RBT) operations. These units can collect evidence next to the side of the road for use in criminal prosecutions. Read: Repeat offenders to be taken off the road under South Africa’s new demerit system