The City of Johannesburg has announced that it will close down the M2 highway as it begins major rehabilitation plans. In a press conference on Monday (18 February), the Johannesburg Roads Agency (JRA) said that it would close down the motorway between the Crown interchange and Maritzburg Street from 28 February 2019. “The closure is necessitated by the continuous monitoring and the bridge visual conditions assessment which indicated that the structural integrity of the concrete elements is severely reduced,” the JRA said. “The JRA realised that parts of the support structure have moved and is affecting the structural stability of some bridges on the M2 motorway.” The JRA added that repairs had already begun on the M2 Selby and Karsene bridges, with the planned completion date set for the end of October 2019. Speaking at the event, Johannesburg mayor, Herman Mashaba, said that the city’s roads were facing a crisis. “As you know, 78% of our bridge infrastructure is in poor condition due to poor maintenance. I have a substantive duty to act in the best interest of residents,” he said. “The current maintenance backlog and poor condition of the City’s bridges requires over R6 billion in expenditure.” Affected roads Mashaba added that a traffic accommodation plan is in place for residents to use alternative routes. However, he noted that a number of on-ramps and off-ramps will be closed for the rehabilitation project which will likely lead to delays. The following on-ramps will be closed as part of the rehabilitation: Main Reef Road on-ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
M1 approaching from the south, ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
M1 approaching from the north, ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
Simmonds Street on-ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
Eloff street on-ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
Heidelberg Road on-ramp onto the M2 westbound from the south and the north;
Heidelberg Road on-ramp onto the M2 eastbound from the north;
Wemmer Pan Road on-ramp onto the M2 westbound;
Eloff street on-ramp onto the M2 westbound;
Booysens Road on-ramp onto the M2 westbound. The following access points will be available to and from the M2: Village road off-ramp;
Heidelberg Road northern on-ramp onto the M2 eastbound;
Maritzburg Street off-ramp;
West Street on-ramp onto the M2 travelling west towards Main Reef or south towards Soweto. Read: Repeat offenders to be taken off the road under South Africa’s new demerit system