Data from Gumtree Automotive shows that provincial traffic departments are raking in millions annually from motorists who want to add a personal touch to their vehicle. The group said that there are also a number of side businesses that have sprung up around personalised plates in the event that you can’t get the name or number that you want. In some instances, these personal registration number brokerages can charge as much as R20,000 for a single plate. How to apply Motorists need to pick a 7-character (or less) name or number. To aid you in selecting this string, a number of provincial traffic departments offer an online or telephonic service to see if a number plate is available. Once you have decided on an available plate, you will then need to visit the nearest local traffic registry office and complete the application form (SLN1). As part of this process, you will need to submit a certified copy of your ID document, a vehicle registration certificate, proof of address and pay a fee. Once approved, you will receive the necessary documents for affixing the plate. This will include: An order letter for the manufacturer giving them permission to make the number plate;
A licensing letter;
An SLN2 form to complete;
A PLN2 certificate stating that you are able to get your desired number plate; Using the certificate and licensing letter, you can now license your car using your new number plate at the local motor vehicle registering office. An official manufacturer must then create and fit your new number plate. Fees According to Gumtree Automotive, you can expect to pay an average of around R1,500 for a personalised plate. However, the group notes that this cost may differ slightly depending on where you apply and what rates are set out by your provincial traffic department. Notably, the cost of the plate can also differ drastically depending on the number and type of characters you choose to include. According to the Western Cape’s pricing guidelines, a plate with six digits or letters in the province will cost R2,000. However, this rises to R10,000 for a plate with a single alpha or numeric character. You can find a break down of the Western Cape’s personalised number plate fees below to get a better idea of the costs involved. Read: This is how much South Africans are paying for their cars