Trend futurist John Sanei calls it “the acceleration of acceleration.” It’s the current tech trend you can’t help but acknowledge, whether you’re a number cruncher by day or a creative freelancer by night. Just think about the state of your business now, compared to ten, five or even two years ago. There’s an undeniable shift towards doing more than ever before, faster than ever before. But we’re only human – for now – so the sheer rate of convergence of technology that’s transforming business models, means we need to keep one eye on the technological opportunities around us, with the other set on avoiding obstacles that would have us veer off that rollercoaster fast, with our business dreams crumbling faster than they can be plastered over by the next big thing. That may seem a little extreme, but it’s rooted in truth… Whether the work you do is based in the information technology sector or not, technological advancements and increased innovation have already changed in the way your job gets done. Over the past few years alone, we’ve seen a tremendous increase in industry disruptors, with rising awareness that if you don’t disrupt yourself, a competitor will do so for you. Then there’s Peter Diamandis’ update on the now 50-year-old classic Moore’s Law: Diamandis predicts that by 2023, just four short years from now, the average thousand-dollar computer will have the ability to function at the same rate as the human brain. So if you don’t keep up with the trends, you may well be replaced by an office bot, without the expensive penchant for coffee. But we need to offer a corollary caution, because time and again big brands have proven that jumping on board too quickly means opening up to risks that just didn’t exist when your business started. Cambridge Analytica-level leaks are a nightmare for anyone involved in customer relationship management and big data – these days, who isn’t? It’s a particularly scary thought for the change-resistant stalwarts out there. Do too little and get replaced, too much and fall of the cliff. Luckily, if we learn from the early adopters and creators who have seen a little into the future, we stand less chance of being left behind, in quickly deciding which tech trends to adopt as soon as possible, and which to ignore – those passing fads that eat up time but don’t add value or buffer your brand’s bottom line. Doing so little by little means before we know it, we’ve adapted those new trends and incorporated them into our daily functioning, as we hurtle into the future, faster than ever before. In fact, TransUnion Africa CEO Lee Naik says: “One of my favourite phrases is ‘when digital stops being a thing, it becomes everything’.” Because while biometrics, robotics, AI, augmented and mixed reality aren’t new, what is new is the way they’re maturing and converging. Your business will benefit if you know how to identify those changes and how to incorporate them. That’s why our next free Meltwater Biz Breakfast session is a must for anyone in the business of business. Taking place on Friday, 8 March 2019, from 9am to 11am SAST at Workshop 17, Cape Town, Naik himself will share 2019’s top tech trends and the purpose of digital in this age of what he calls exponential technology acceleration. Key among these will be insights into how to effectively reflect and reimagine your business, by stripping away the hype and understanding the opportunity for disruption. Sound good? Come for breakfast, insights, and the knowhow you need to power ahead in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Register here. To get an idea of what’s in store, check out the aftermovie from our JHB edition.  This article was published in partnership with Meltwater.