Medical aid scheme Momentum has announced new prices and other changes for its Multiply rewards programme. The group announced a 7.7% increase in membership fees for 2019, with Multiply Premier now costing R238 per month for a single person, R298 per month for a family of two and R328 per month for a family of three or more. Changes to earning points According to the group, Multiply has added two additional ways for its members to earn points. The first is by completing high endurance elite events such as marathons and cycle challenges. The second is by choosing to get cash-backs instead of discounts on purchases from the Multiply online shop. Members will also be able to unlock and earn up to 240 points for Active Dayz by undergoing fitness assessments or participating in the high endurance elite events. They can unlock more points for Safe Dayz by conducting car safety checks at Tiger Wheel & Tyre outlets, while the scheme has partnered with cycling manufacturers, Giant, Liv and Avalanche, to give members discounts on cycling products in selected stores around the ncountry. “Members will get a 10% discount in store, and can also earn up to 15% in cash back when they scan their till slips using SnapnSave,” the group said. The group is also introducing KidsReturns, where child dependants under the age of 21 can earn HealthReturns on the Momentum Health Incentive, Extender and Summit options – encouraging families to exercise together. “For more family fun, members now pay as little as R51 for 3D movies and R32 for 2D movies at Nu Metro cinemas nationwide,” the group said. Changes to Multiply Money Late in 2018, Momentum launched Multiply Money, an e-wallet that allowed members to earn real cash by shopping for household and grocery items at Pick n Pay and Dis-Chem, or for vouchers and big brand electronic devices via the Multiply online shop. In 2019, the interest earned on the account has increased from 5.25% to 5.5%. “Cashbacks can be used to save for an emergency or until there is a lump sum for long term investments. They also can be spent anywhere in South Africa using the Multiply Visa Card or via mobile payments at selected retailers using the Multiply Money app,” the group said. Notably, the cash-back at Pick n Pay and Dis-Chem that was usually under one benefit will no longer be combined, as the business will focus on the grocery and pharmaceutical categories in future, it said. Families will get cashbacks on the first R3,000 they spend per month at Pick n Pay as well as on the first R2,000 they spend per month at Dis-Chem. They will continue to get 2% in cash-backs from Dis-Chem when they spend over R2 000 for the rest of the month. Momentum Health members can now get up to R3,000 back in cash for day-to- day medical expenses, which increased from R2,500. Read:Insurance loyalty programmes compared: Sanlam Reality vs Discovery Vitality vs Momentum Multiply