Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: The battle between public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane and public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan has escalated yet again, with Mkhwebane threatening to initiate contempt proceedings against him unless he can provide evidence that she is corrupt or working a political plot against him as was claimed in court documents he submitted in a bid to block the implementation of her report. Mkhwebane says Gordhan is trying to get her removed. [M&G] Former president Jacob Zuma’s testimony at the state capture commission is reopening wounds left by the ANC’s fierce factional battle that has been taking place over the last decade. Zuma spent his second day at the commission accusing several people and at least three intelligence agencies of trying to topple him for the last 30 years. He is yet to provide any evidence in the form of corroborating events, dates, documents or affidavits to his claims, however. [News24] The EFF says that its threatening move towards public enterprises minister Pravin Gordhan to stop him from delivering his budget vote last week was simply the party exercising its right to ‘peaceful protest’. Spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said that no one touched Gordhan, and insisted that no matter what anyone does it says the party won’t be stopped. [ENCA] South African musician and icon Johnny Clegg has passed away at the age of 66. He enjoyed legendary status in South Africa as an iconic performer who crossed racial and cultural barriers. One of the few white people to openly confront apartheid, and became fames both locally and abroad as a singer, songwriter, dancer and anthropologist. He was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2015. [EWN] South Africa’s rand edged weaker in subdued trade on Tuesday with market participants awaiting a local lending rates decision and one by the US central bank next week before making any big calls. On Wednesday the rand was at R13.98 to the dollar, R17.35 to the pound and R15.68 to the euro.