Afrihost has launched its new Pure Fibre offerings, which comprise a new selection of uncapped, unshaped fibre-to-the-home packages. These packages are offered across multiple networks and are significantly cheaper than the competition, delivering some of the best value in the South African fibre market. To encourage users to switch to Afrihost Pure Fibre, Afrihost is offering up to R5,000 in value to clients who sign up. “Clients who sign up for a new Pure Fibre installation with Afrihost will receive free installation and activation, a Wi-Fi router, and up to 2 months free service.” Additionally, existing customers who migrate their lines from another ISP will be given credit equal to their migration fees, a Wi-Fi router, and up to three months free service. There are only a limited number of sign-up promotions available, and customers are encouraged to sign up as quickly as possible to take advantage of the service. Should customers cancel their Pure Fibre less than 6 months from installation, or should their account falls into arrears, they will be charged a cancellation fee of R999. The prices of Afrihost fibre packages have been slashed significantly compared to its previous offerings, with the Pure Fibre packages being some of the cheapest in South Africa. Unthrottled usage also applies across all fibre networks, including Openserve, whereas Afrihost previously offered various uncapped tiers with varying degrees of throttling. Terminology such as “Home Uncapped” and “Premium Uncapped” has now been scrapped, with the Pure Fibre packages delivering an unshaped, unthrottled connection for some of the best prices on the market. We have listed the prices of Afrihost’s new Pure Fibre packages across Vumatel and Openserve networks below, comparing them to the company’s previous uncapped products. We used the legacy pricing for Afrihost’s “Priority Uncapped” as of March 2019 as a benchmark for the company’s old prices, as these were the only packages which also offered uncapped, unshaped, and unthrottled connections. Openserve fibre packages are only available with asynchronous speeds, with the upload speeds being half the maximum download speeds. This is more than enough for most consumer usage, however, as upload speed is a much smaller factor in network performance than download speed for most Internet users. Afrihost’s Pure Fibre packages on Openserve are some of the cheapest in the market, with the company cutting the price of its products substantially in its new offering. Below are Afrihost’s Pure Fibre deals on Openserve.  Afrihost offers Vumatel fibre packages in both synchronous and asynchronous configurations. Synchronous packages offer constantly identical download and upload speeds, while Vumatel’s asynchronous packages usually have download speeds ten times larger than their upload speeds. Vumatel’s asynchronous packages usually offer more than enough upload speed for everyday tasks paired with very fast download speeds. These packages are notably cheaper than the synchronous options. Below are Afrihost’s Pure Fibre deals on Vumatel.  This article was published in partnership with Afrihost.