The new Ford Mustang is available in South Africa, boasting a sleeker, more athletic styling, sophisticated engine and suspension enhancements. “Ford’s galloping pony remains one of the best-selling sports cars in South Africa having sold 2,615 units since it went on sale locally in 2016, the car maker said in April. Available in Fastback and Convertible body styles with a choice of uprated 2.3 EcoBoost and 5.0 V8 engines matched to Ford’s advanced 10-speed automatic transmission, the Mustang profile now features more refined aerodynamics, and is enhanced with LED lighting technology, and a choice of nine bold exterior colours. Adding further appeal to the new range is the special edition Ford Mustang Bullitt that will be available at launch, paying homage to the Mustang GT fastback. Offered in classic Bullitt-exclusive Dark Highland Green or Shadow Black, along with a range of unique styling and feature enhancements, only 50 units of the Mustang Bullitt will be available, powered by an uprated 338kW version of Ford’s 5.0-litre V8 that delivers enhanced performance and a more engaging driving experience thanks to the fitment of a six-speed manual gearbox.  More aggressive face The exterior of the new Ford Mustang delivers a sleeker, more athletic appearance, Ford said. The bonnet profile is now lower with integrated air vents, combined with a revised lower grille design to give the Mustang a sharper, more aggressive face, while improving aerodynamics. The Mustang’s dramatic rear-end design is further enhanced with a re-modelled bumper and diffuser element, accommodating standard quad-tailpipes for the 5.0-litre GT model that testify to the power and performance available. Mustang’s headlights, daytime running lights, indicators and iconic three-dimensional tri-bar tail lights now all feature LED technology as standard, combined with LED fog lights. The front headlight bezels have also been restyled to reflect the trapezoidal shape of the upper grille, the carmaker said. Three bold, dynamic new metallic paint colours are available – Kona Blue, Orange Fury and Velocity Blue. New 19-inch alloy wheels are offered in multiple finishes depending on model, along with 19″x9″ Luster Nickel-painted Forged Aluminium versions that are available as an option. The new Mustang interior delivers a more premium feel. Soft touch materials now feature for the door linings and the door handles are finished in aluminium, Ford said. Leather-trimmed, heated and cooled seats are provided in conjunction with six-way electric adjustment for maximum comfort. Ultimate performance Ford’s 5.0-litre V8 engine has been further developed to deliver more power and a higher rev-limit than ever before. Peak power climbs from 309kW on the previous model to 331kW, with an accompanying torque peak of 529Nm supported by the introduction of Ford’s new high-pressure direct injection and low-pressure port fuel injection system which improves low-end torque. The more fuel-efficient 2.3-litre EcoBoost petrol engine delivers 213kW and 441Nm of torque – an increase of 11Nm. “The revised engine offers a more responsive and engaging driving experience thanks to a transient overboost function for the turbocharger – triggered under heavy acceleration to provide an extra burst of boost following each up-shift,” Ford said. Ford’s pioneering 10-speed automatic transmission is standard across the range. Real-time adaptive shift-scheduling allows the transmission to adapt to changing conditions and select the right gear in any situation. Steering wheel-mounted paddle-shifters give drivers maximum control. New Active Valve Performance Exhaust technology means drivers can for the first time adjust the intensity of the Mustang’s exhaust note to suit their mood and the driving scenario. Recalibrated shock absorbers improve stability through corners, and the rear suspension is stiffened with a cross-axis joint that reduces unwanted movement at each corner, which can lead to body flex. Thicker anti-roll bars also better control body-roll for sharper handling. Smart tech for safety The New Mustang is offered with a comprehensive range of driver assistance technologies including Pre-Collision Assist with Pedestrian Detection – designed to reduce the severity of and, in some cases, even mitigate frontal collisions involving vehicles and pedestrians. For the first time Mustang is equipped with Adaptive Cruise Control and Distance Alert technologies that help drivers maintain an appropriate distance to the vehicle ahead, as well as Lane Departure Warning that can warn when drivers unintentionally drift out of lane, and Lane Keeping Aid that can apply torque to the steering wheel to steer the vehicle back into lane. Prices: Mustang 2.3 Fastback 10AT: R768,000
Mustang 2.3 Convertible 10AT: R831,000
Mustang 5.0 GT Fastback 10AT: R915,800
Mustang 5.0 GT Convertible 10AT: R978,400
Mustang Bullitt 5.0 V8 GT Fastback 6MT: R995,400 All models come standard with Ford Protect, comprising a four-year/120,000km comprehensive warranty, three-year/unlimited distance roadside assistance and five-year/unlimited km corrosion warranty. A six-year/90,000km service plan is included, with 15,000km service intervals.        Read: South Africans ditch demo cars for older models priced under R200,000