The Gautrain Management Agency (GMA) will add new trains to cope with increasing demand. Speaking to BusinessTech Dr Barbara Jensen, senior executive manager of communication and marketing at the GMA, said that the service would increase the number of current train sets that will be during peak-times. “Currently there are not enough trains during peak times to carry the passengers who travel in the peak periods between (06h00 to 09h00 and 15h00 to 18h00) and this prevents us from increasing ridership in these peaks,” she said. She added that the GMA was still looking to expand the Gautrain service but was waiting for final approval from the National Treasury. “The status remains that the feasibility study for the extensions has been submitted to National Treasury in 2017 for Treasury Approval 1 (TA1) for Phase 1 of the proposed network implementation scenarios,” she said. “The date of the outcome of the TA1 application is dependent on National Treasury. In the meantime the GMA is in continually engaging with the National Treasury to enable the finalisation of this process.” However, Jensen said that the GMA has also initiated a preliminary route alignment study to determine the route for Phases 1 and 2 of the proposed network. “This study is being undertaken as per the prescripts of the Gauteng Transport Infrastructure Act (“GTIA”) and will result in the MEC of Transport being able to formally gazette the route alignments for these phases,” she said. Expansion In 2017, the GMA announced that it would be conducting a feasibility study into the expansion of the network with a total of 19 new stations being proposed for the expansion. Among others, the expansion is set to include new stations in: Boksburg;
The East Rand Mall;
Irene;
Mamelodi;
Sunninghill
Fourways;
Roodepoort;
Lanseria.  “The 19 stations are all part of the feasibility study which broke the total of 150 km into 5 phases,” said Jensen. “This allows long term planning but as stated in the response above at this stage we have only applied to National Treasury for approval for Phase 1. This Phase runs from Marlboro to Sandton to Randburg to Cosmo to Little Falls.” Read: Cape Town traffic cameras will now target unlicensed vehicles