FNB is expanding the functionality of its banking app, with the launch of new savings, health and fitness goal tracking through Nav Money and Nav Wellness. The Nav platform launched on FNB’s banking app in 2016, starting with home tools (Nav Home) to help customers buy and sell property; this then expanded to vehicles (Nav Car), allowing customers to pay fines and renew vehicle licences, and then to general finance (Nav Money) to track spending and credit scores. Most recently, the platform opened up for customers to safely book and pay for domestic and international flights on the FNB App, with savings of up to 40% in discounts from major airlines. The bank is now introducing savings tracking to Nav Money, and introducing Nav Wellness, which will let customers track various health and fitness goals, and offer discounts on healthy lifestyle services. Nav Money savings The saving goals process has been designed to calculate how much a customer needs to save for a goal, recommend a personalised savings solution and include the ability to track progress, FNB said. It gives customers the option of maintaining 10 main savings goals categories, including: education, emergencies, travel, save to start a business as well as health and wellness – and has over 50 different sub categories. Customers also have an option to create and name their own goal.. Nav Wellness The new wellness features help customers setup and track their health and fitness journey on the FNB App. Customers fill-in a questionnaire to gain insights into their wellness score before setting goals to improve that score. A separate feature enables customers to order prescription medicine from their nearest Dis-Chem, from within the FNB App, and get notified when it is ready for collection, the group said. “The bank has also negotiated attractive discounts with a number of health and wellness partners to help customers navigate their wellness journey with great savings. There are several permanent discounts, and a monthly deals section with exciting discounts that refresh monthly,” the bank said. Deals include: VIVA Gyms: 40% off 12-month contract if paid in full up front;
Body Tec: 35% off a 10-session contract and/or 75% off a trial voucher and eBucks are accepted;
Life Day Spa: 20% off during the week with the convenience of using eBucks to pay for treatments;
Bounce: 25% off for Bounce Fit/Students/Junior Jumpers/General Access and eBucks are accepted;
DNAlysis: 35% off diet, health and sport genetic testing and accepts eBucks; Monthly Deals will include discounts which change month to month. Current discounts are from Fitchef, Faithful to Nature, Ucook, Life Day Spa, Bounce and Bodytec. More partners and deals will be announced as they happen, FNB said. Read: eBucks members can now book flights on the FNB app