Intensifying economic, social, and political disruption is forcing organisations to move beyond mission statements and social impact programmes, to putting humans at the centre of their business strategies and learning to lead the social enterprise. This is according to Deloitte’s latest Human Capital Trends report for South Africa, which comes with a bold call to action for organisations to reinvent the social enterprise. A social enterprise is an organisation whose mission combines revenue growth and profit-making with the need to respect and support its environment and stakeholder network. This includes listening to, investing in, and actively managing the trends that are shaping today’s world. The global report draws on insights from over 9,000 global survey respondents, including 345 respondents from South Africa, and examines ways in which organisations can drive the reinvention of the workforce, the organisation, and HR on a broad scale, and change every aspect of how they interact with, motivate, and create meaningful experiences for their workforce. Deloitte has organised the 10 human capital trends for reinvention of 2019 into three actionable categories, which are outlined below. This deals with how organisations should adapt to the forces restructuring job and work design, the open talent economy, and leadership. The second category deals with how teams, networks, and new approaches to rewards are driving business performance. The third category deals with how the HR function is stepping up to the challenge of redesigning its capabilities, technologies, and focus to leading transformation in HR and across the enterprise. While technology is helping organisations to gain a competitive advantage, if not managed appropriately, it can simultaneously mean that workers lose their identity in the workplace. To bring meaning back into the workplace and a human identity back to the worker, it is clear that traditional human capital programmes, processes and policies should be fundamentally reinvented. However, reinvention can be a daunting prospect. In fact, Deloitte’s survey shows that many organisations are not ready to address the changes in the ten trends described above. For that reason, Deloitte have focused not only on the why and the what, but also how organisations can go about reinventing themselves. According to Deloitte, depending on your organisation’s readiness and need to change, reinvention can happen in one of three ways: You can refresh – update and improve the way you work now,
You can rewire – create new connections that change the way you work, or
You can recode – start over and redesign from scratch. To find out more read the full report, downloadable from the right side of this page of the Deloitte website. This article was published in partnership with Deloitte.