CareerJunction has released its latest jobs index, showing the which jobs are most in demand in South Africa. The CareerJunction Index (CJI) represents online labour dynamics in South Africa by providing a detailed analysis of the relative ratio of supply and demand in the online job market. The CJI is based on comprehensive data gathered from the CareerJunction website. “The June index settled at 94 index points, indicating weakening employment prospects and increased competition for jobs following an expected decrease in job advertising amid the June school holidays,” the company said, “June saw an uptake in jobs across the medical, construction and cleaning, maintenance & repair sectors, leading to a notable growth in medical jobs year-on-year.” The admin, office & support, engineering, business & management and ICT sectors, on the other hand, have experienced weakening demand over the last 12 months. Trending jobs for June include sales representatives/consultants, systems & network administrators and admin clerks. In-demand jobs The below-trending jobs provide an indication of positions that have become more popular in the online job market and has seen a recent spike in demand. Representative / Sales Consulting Average salary offerings for intermediate level position: GP: R19,704 to R26,072 pm
WC: R18,923 to R22,615 pm
KZN: R18,929 to R24,412 pm Systems / Network Administration Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R27,341 to R35,935 pm
WC: R23,865 to R35,306 pm
KZN: Not available Admin Clerk Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R17,608 to R18,537 pm
WC: R15,043 to R17,778 pm
KZN: R13,250 to R16,907 pm Demand vs supply  An overview of vacancy levels across various sectors (indicated by the demand graph) provides a good indication of where the majority of employment takes place. The IT, business & management and finance sectors are undoubtedly the most sought after sectors, followed by the sales, admin, office & support and architecture & engineering sectors, among others listed. When looking at active job seekers across various sectors (indicated by the Supply graph), areas of high supply correlate closely to areas of high demand, however supply outstrips demand in some areas, leading to a competitive environment for job seekers. June saw an uptake in jobs across the medical, construction and cleaning, maintenance & repair sectors, while job volumes remain lower year-on-year in the construction and cleaning, maintenance and repair sectors, medical jobs have grown by 38%. Read: This is when South Africa’s new parental leave laws will be ready to launch