Nestled in the leafy suburb of Randpark Ridge, Orchid Ridge lies your future dream home. The latest addition to our growing portfolio of upscale property developments, Orchid Ridge has it all: Luxury, security, value-for-money, location, and of course the promise of a beautiful, family-friendly lifestyle. Looking to invest? With higher rental yield than the average market, Orchid Ridge is the perfect place to get in on the ground floor and watch your investment grow, with this beautiful suburb gaining popularity with young professionals and families alike. If you are a young professional yourself, Orchid Ridge’s ideal placement on the corner of Beyers Naude and CR Swart Roads means that you’ll always be perfectly located for both work and play, with the proximity of the N1 highway making getting most anywhere in Joburg a breeze. Need to work from home? No problem – Orchid Ridge apartments are completely wifi-ready and have the latest fibre optic technology already installed. And, on top of this, all units are beautifully fitted with market-leading modern sanitaryware by Kohler to ensure that your home is just as chic as you are. Are you a young family, or looking to have kids sometime soon? Orchid Ridge is also the full package when it comes to creating the kind of world where your children can grow and flourish. Like all of our exclusive properties, Orchid Ridge comes complete with a clubhouse, gym, pool, and a children’s play area, perfect for letting your little ones experience the great outdoors, while also guaranteeing peace of mind that they’ll be safe. In fact, because we know that the safety of your family is of the utmost importance, the property also features 24-hour security and biometric access. You can’t get more family-friendly than Orchid Ridge! With its convenient location as part of the larger Randburg area, Randpark Ridge is bordered by the beautiful suburbs of Weltevreden Park, Boskruin, Fairland, and Honeydew. Nearby, the N1 Highway seamlessly connects this residential haven with popular business and shopping districts like Sandton and the Johannesburg CBD, while hopping on Beyers Naude or CR Swart can easily take you to lifestyle centres like Cresta and Clearwater to enjoy great food and entertainment. Or, if you’re wanting to get back in touch with nature, this gorgeous suburb’s proximity to the Magaliesburg makes the countryside a tangible aspect of your everyday life. Your comfort and peace of mind are imperative to us, which is why Orchid Ridge is fully equipped with 24-hour security and biometric security. So, when you lay your head down to rest at night, or head out to work for the day, you can relax knowing that your loved ones, your belongings, and your lifestyle are safely looked after. Orchid Ridge is conveniently located in the hub of the north-western suburbs, making it a gem of an investment close to nature reserves, schools, churches, and shopping centres. Some of the educational highlights of the Randpark Ridge area include Rand Park High and Primary Schools, as well as Trinityhouse High School and Aurora Private School, making it an attractive option for parents with children of any school-going age. And with so many different unit options to choose from, there are homes to suit singles, couples, and families of all sizes! Select from a 1-bedroom, 1-bathroom apartment, all the way up to a 3-bedroom, 2-bathroom family home. At Orchid Ridge, the unique architectural design approach exudes opulence, and this is an undeniable opportunity for investors and first-time buyers alike. To introduce you to your new dream home, we’ll be hosting a family-filled Open Day at Orchid Ridge on the 3rd of August 2019 from 11am to 3pm. Here, you’ll be able to view show units of our 1-bedroom, 1-bathroom and 2-bedroom, 1-bathroom units, with refreshments available and so much more! Plus, there will be Smeg appliances up for grabs, and up to R300 off per square unit of your unit, only available on the day. See you there!     This article was published in partnership with Reeflords.