Pargo, South Africa’s leading Click and Collect service provider, recently launched Instant Click and Collect. This service allows customers to instantly collect their orders at a Pargo Pick-up Point of their choice, without having to wait for the delivery. Pargo’s innovative Instant Click and Collect delivery particularly appeals to Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs) in need of an instant, convenient, and affordable delivery method for SIM cards. Pargo effectively allows MVNOs to pre-ship and store SIM cards at selected pick-up points, so that they are immediately available for collection when the customer places an order. This is built on Pargo’s current platform, which manages all communication and client tracking. The innovative service is available at any of the 2,000+ Pargo Pick-up Points across the country, including Clicks, Lewis, and Caltex stores. Two MVNOs that have started using the service are The Unlimited and TRACE Mobile. Customers order their SIM card via a call centre or online via their app and instantly receive a collection notification, which enables them to walk into the Pargo Pick-up Point to collect, with no delay. A major bonus is that certain Pargo Points are open 24/7, meaning that collections can also be done at night or over the weekend. “A seamless delivery experience, in which speed plays an essential role, is crucial for our business. Because our customers are situated all over the country, and not just in major centres, we have partnered with Pargo to offer our customers Instant Click and Collect and ensure that the service provided to our customers is effortless and in the shortest timeframe,” said Siddeek Rahim, MD at The Unlimited’s MVNO. During the launch of TRACE Mobile, TRACE Mobile Vice-President Mobile and Marketing, Prescillia Avenel-Delpha, said that innovation is a key success factor for both TRACE and Pargo. “It is great to be able to join forces to disrupt the industry. We are very proud of launching one of a kind digital distribution in partnership with Pargo that challenges the old way of doing things,” said Avenel-Delpha. Speed and convenience are crucial when it comes to parcel delivery and there is a huge push for companies around the world to get parcels into their customer’s hands faster and more cost effectively. “Leading ecommerce companies from Shanghai to New York are already offering 1-to-3-hour delivery options so we are extremely proud to have taken delivery time completely out of the equation,” says Lars Veul, CEO at Pargo. “With Instant Click and Collect, companies can ensure their customers never have to wait for their delivery again.” Businesses interested in Pargo’s Instant Click and Collect services can get in touch via business@pargo.co.za.