FNB says that eBucks Rewards members can now book domestic and international flights directly from the bank’s app. FNB stressed that customers who book and pay for flights via the app will never have to expose their card details to third parties or other websites. “The travel offering emphasises our commitment to addressing the needs of customers through a trusted, safer and convenient platform. The proposition significantly expands the value we give customers and their families, in line with our focus on family banking,” said Raj Makanjee, chief executive officer of FNB Retail. Makanjee said the travel feature expands the suite of services under the eBucks tab, which include Shop on App, latest offers, complimentary lounge visits, registering for the Entertainer APP discounts and a useful guide on how customers can earn more eBucks. FNB & RMB Private Bank customers can expect discounts of up to 40% off on domestic and international flights. They will also have the ability to manage bookings, view their discounts and maintain family profiles on the app. Important changes to eBucks travel include: No minimum eBucks amount required to qualify for discounts when booking flights on eBucks Travel. Members will qualify for discounts using eBucks, an FNB/RMB Private Bank card or a combination of both.
Each person in your family with a qualifying FNB account, will now get their own Discounted Flight Allocation:

Domestic Flights: Each family member will get 16 one-way economy or 8 return economy flight allocations per year
International Flights: Each family member will get 2 return economy / premium economy flight allocations OR 1 return business flight allocation per year


Your spouse and children will continue to qualify on the main member’s discounts of up to 40% off on flights with eBucks Travel, if both you and your spouse hold the same qualifying FNB/RMB Private Bank Cheque, Credit or Fusion Account or are on the Spousal pricing option.
To qualify, the main member’s spouse must also be part of their FNB/RMB Private Bank Family Banking Profile and the main member’s eBucks Traveller Profile.
As a main eBucks member, you will still qualify for discounts when booking for yourself without being on the spousal pricing option. “FNB customers can now compare flights, get discounts as well as get additional Slow lounge visits all when using the FNB App.  We look forward to expanding on this and providing even more value to our customers,” said eBucks rewards chief executive officer, Johan Moolman. To access and start using Flights on app, customers must have an existing eBucks account and have the latest version of the FNB/RMB Private Bank app. Follow these steps to book your flights on app: RMB Private Banking clients should follow the same instructions through their RMB Private Bank app. Read: Here are the new eBucks rewards changes for 2019