Transitioning into adulthood can be an overwhelming and scary process. Log on to any social media platform and you’re bound to come across someone bemoaning the unrelenting responsibilities that come with “adulting”. Although some of the complaints are written in jest, the underlying issue is anything but a joke. Plenty of young adults feel ill-equipped to take on the challenges they face once they leave the nest. This doesn’t bode well for the country’s future. The simple fact is young people are going to inherit this country, and it’s going to take more than optimism to prepare them for the mammoth task that awaits them. The best way to predict the future is to create it, and that’s done by moulding young people into responsible adults. Mentorship is not a new concept. The word mentor comes from an ancient Greek tale about Odysseus, a king who placed his son Telemachus in the care of a friend by the name of Mentor. Although the value of having a good mentor has become pretty self-evident, plenty of researchers have studied the impact of mentorship of young people. Research found that at-risk youth benefit the most from mentorship. When such young people are mentored, they are 55% more likely to further their studies, 78% more likely to volunteer on a regular basis, and 130% more likely to hold a leadership position. Now, more than ever, young people are spoilt for choice when it comes to mentorship opportunities. The National Mentorship Movement, a South African initiative created in 2015, is a platform that connects aspiring business owners with experienced entrepreneurs. The stated aim of the project is “to start a conversation that will lead to the exchanging of ideas, experience thereby increasing the chances of success”. Then there’s MiWay. Primarily known for its car insurance and business insurance services, the company is also doing its part to turn young people into productive members of society. MiWay’s Leaders in the Making programme, an annual initiative, provides mentorship and skills training to learners from various Gauteng high schools. The mentorship programme also awards bursaries and gives participants the opportunity to job shadow. We can probably all agree that nothing gives you the power to live life your way more than the opportunity to work and stand on your own two feet. When it comes to companies and individuals who are willing to make a personal investment in the youth, there are far too many to list. The onus is on young people to make use of these opportunities while they’re still available. In the words of the late American evangelist Leonard Ravenhill, “the opportunity of a lifetime must be seized within the lifetime of the opportunity.” This article was published in partnership with MiWay.