With long-awaited changes to EB-5 US residency visas and Green Cards finally here, South Africans planning to enter the United States under this popular Immigrant Investor Programme must now aim to lodge their applications before the 21 November 2019 deadline. The EB-5 visa requires applicants to commit to a large investment that will create additional employment in the US. It does not, however, require the investor to be involved in the day-to-day activities of the relevant business, and the investor may be a minor owner. The new stipulations will see the investment required to qualify for an EB-5 visa increase from $500,000 to $900,000, once this deadline has passed. “Investors must act fast to make an EB-5 application at $500,000 now or risk paying $900,000 after the November deadline,” said Norris Mukembe, Principal Director at EB-5 Africa Advisors. EB-5 Africa Advisors is a leading immigration by investment advisory with a trusted track record of helping African investors with their immigration to the US through the EB-5 residency visa method. With offices in LA and Johannesburg, EB-5 Africa Advisors is well equipped to assist these prospective immigrants with the entire process of attaining an EB-5 residency visa, including ensuring financial due-diligence and providing legal support. Together with their partners – WolfsDorf Rosenthal Immigration Attorneys and Maryland Center for Foreign Investment (MCFI) – EB-5 Africa Advisors will be hosting a series of webinars every Thursday from 1 August to inform qualifying investors of the steps they must take to ensure they meet the 21 November deadline. The webinars will cover: Picking a secure investment.
Accurately and promptly preparing a source of funds for the application.
Proving to US immigrations authorities how you legally obtained these funds.
Understanding the new changes to the US EB-5 law. For more information about their services, or to register for the series of webinars, contact Mukembe via email or on the following phone number: +27812803023 Alternatively, visit the EB-5 Africa Advisors website for more information on the upcoming webinars. This article was published in partnership with EB-5 Africa Advisors.