Listed financial services company, Sanlam has advised of a number of executive changes at the group with effect from 01 August 2019, including financial director, Heinie Werth, who will take over a new role as chief executive officer (CEO) of Sanlam Emerging Markets. Junior Ngulube, who is the CEO of Sanlam Pan Africa and due to retire in 18 months, will take on the role of vice chairman of SPA. Sanlam Emerging Markets is the business cluster responsible for Sanlam’s businesses across 33 countries in Africa (Sanlam Pan Africa), as well as the group’s other emerging markets business in India, Lebanon and Malaysia. Wikus Olivier, currently the executive head: group finance will act in the position of interim chief financial officer (CFO) with effect from 01 August 2019 until the group commences a recruitment process to fill the role of Group FD permanently. Sanlam said that these executive changes are part of succession planning and support its resolve to execute its Pan-Africa and emerging markets strategy in this bigger cluster for the success of the broader group. “We will immediately start the process to recruit a new Group Financial Director and we will inform the market about our progress in due course. We are confident that Wikus has the requisite skills and is well poised to support the Group acting in the CFO role. He has been with Sanlam for 19 years in a variety of roles, including accounting, finance and tax and has worked closely with Heinie and I for many years,” said Sanlam group CEO, Ian Kirk. Werth, who will continue in his role as an executive director on the Sanlam Limited Board, was previously the CEO of Sanlam Developing Markets (SDM) and SEM for 10 years from 2006 until 2016 when he took up his current position as the group’s FD. Earlier this year, he assumed the additional responsibility for the businesses in Lebanon, India and Malaysia. Ngulube, who joined Sanlam in 2016 as the first CEO of the newly established Sanlam Corporate business cluster, will retain his membership of the group’s executive committee reporting to the group CEO and will remain a director on the Board of Santam Limited. Read: Patrice Motsepe’s ARC to launch insurance company with Sanlam