Toyota has launched a limited-edition model Hilux boasting the ‘GR’ logo. The Hilux GR Sport is the second tier in its GR-product pyramid, which encompasses suspension upgrades and cosmetic enhancements. The Hilux GR Sport is equipped with a 2.8 GD-6 turbodiesel engine which delivers 130 kW and 450 Nm. The engine has been mated with a 6-speed automatic transmission (with manual and sport modes) and ‘switch-on-the-fly’ 4WD transaxle. Toyota said that that heart of the Hilux GR’s upgrades centre around the bespoke Gazoo Racing suspension. Gazoo Racing represents Toyota’s unified motorsport arm, competing in various global motorsport disciplines such as the World Rally Championship, NASCAR, and Dakar. “Driver selectable power and eco modes alter the driving performance accordingly, by adapting throttle response and transmission shift logic,” Toyota said. “The shock absorbers have been changed to a monotube design with revised damping, working in conjunction with increased front spring rates to offer a sportier ride without sacrificing ride comfort. The rear leaf spring rates have been left unaltered to maintain the existing payload,” it said.  Exterior The exterior of the GR Sport includes Gazoo Racing branding and signature red, white, and black decals. It also features an enlarged, honeycomb front grille and a gloss-black finish – accompanied by a GR badge. The vertical fog-lamp features a red or white outline – dependent on exterior colour – whilst all models feature a black bonnet and roof. Interior The infotainment system features an enlarged 20.3cm display with additional rotary dials for volume and tune functions. A TFT Multi-information display with steering wheel control, relays a variety of information to the driver including audio, compass, navigation prompts, trip info and fuel consumption. The GR Sport features a black leather interior with red contrast stitching.  Pricing The GR Sport is offered in three colours –  Glacier White, Arizona Red or Attitude Black – matching that of the Gazoo Racing livery. The new Hilux will only be sold as a sole double-cab model, Toyota said, and will retail for R707,400 with only 600 models being built. 50th edition Hilux Toyota has also unveiled a new Hilux package upgrade to celebrate 50 years in South Africa  – the Legend 50. The Legend 50 package has been applied to all Raider models across all three body shapes (Single-, Xtra- and Double Cab). All Legend 50 models are powered by a 2.8 GD-6 engine delivering 130 kW and 420Nm. These can be paired with both 4×2 (Raised Body) or 4×4 drivetrains. A number of exterior changes include a blacked-out grille, chrome exterior mirrors and door handles, and new Legend 50 tyres. Prices start at R472,000 for the single-cab, rising to R712,100 for the most expensive double-cab model.   Read: These are the safest and most unsafe budget cars to drive in South Africa