Huawei says that its new EMUI 9.1 operating system upgrade will begin rolling out this month for selected devices. The OS update include a host of new features, including the third iteration of Huawei’s GPU Turbo technology, which improves gaming performance while reducing power consumption, MyBroadband has reported. The number of compatible games which take full advantage of this technology has also increased from 6 to 25, including PUBG, Fortnite, and Kings of Glory. Below are a few of the biggest upgrades coming in the EMUI 9.1 update for South African Huawei users: Extendable Read-Only File System (EROFS) – Improves overall device performance by approximately 20% up to 63.3MB/s, while also saving more than 2GB of system storage.
Huawei Vlog – Allows users to create and share 10-second videos using the native Huawei video editor, and also enables slow-motion and fast-motion videos.
Huawei Video Ringtone – Allows users to set up their favourite video as the default ringtone for their contacts.
Huawei Share OneHop – Simply tap your phone to your Huawei computer to send files in seconds.
Interface – One-handed gesture navigation and dynamic screen resizing, as well as a simpler and more intuitive user interface. Update roll-out The EMUI 9.1 update will be available freely to the majority of Huawei’s latest devices available in South Africa, and will be rolled out over the next three months. “As with all Huawei smart devices, customers will be sent a notification of the pending upgrade, which they can then download,” Huawei said. “Once the upgrade is activated, they can start enjoying the many enhancements made to their devices.” The EMUI 9.1 update will roll out to the Huawei Mate 20 Pro, Mate 10 Pro, P20 Pro, P20, Mate 10 Porsche Design, and Mate RS in July 2019. The Huawei P10 Plus, P10, Mate 9, Mate 20 lite, P30 lite, P Smart 2019, Y6 2019, and Y5 2019 will receive this operating system upgrade in August 2019. Huawei’s P30 Series smartphones already have access to the EMUI 9.1 update. Read: US hits back at Huawei’s constitutional challenge to sales ban