With the explosive growth in real-time applications, distributed workforces and cloud computing, a company’s productivity has never been more dependent on their network infrastructure. For this reason, organisations are turning their focus to their wide area networks (WANs) and cloud-access networks, knowing that success lies in: However, the network transition process to build a better WAN isn’t always easy. Intelys helps customers build better WANs by dramatically lowering costs, boosting business performance, accelerating time to value and ultimately achieving the deliverables that a business and its users demand in a digital world. “Whilst our approach and architecture begin with a robust, secure SD-WAN foundation, it also considers the current network environment and security elements and offers a transition approach with a virtual WAN overlay that doesn’t require a rip and replace or forklift approach on your existing WAN,” said Intelys. This is one of the key advantages of working with the Intelys team. They are completely vendor and service provider agnostic and are comfortable managing the virtual overlay over a mix and match of carriers across multiple geographies. In other words, you can start immediately and migrate at your own pace, without disruption and with minimal risk to business. In transitioning clients’ WANs to a secure cloud-ready network, Intelys has gained insight into the many challenges clients are faced with. Because of this, Intelys have developed a hosted environment called SNAP – Secure Network Aggregation Point – to make network transition easy. Through SNAP, clients across multiple network providers have complete flexibility and scalability, allowing seamless managed connectivity across varying technologies. It not only allows clients access to the Intelys SD-WAN gateways and entire managed services stack but also affords clients secure managed access to NAP Africa and the Teraco exchange, as well as any other partners or suppliers offering services in this proximity, facilitated via the Intelys Partner Interconnect model. Through the Intelys Partner Interconnect model, Intelys integrates your business partners into your organisation by implementing encrypted connections for secure, reliable and integrity-protected communication. The service monitors the usage, availability, and performance of the business-critical partner connections. Each connection is an interconnect presented via Intelys’ hosted firewall environment with an encrypted IPsec tunnel (optional) from your organisation to your business partner. The Partner Connect Service provides intelligent monitoring and support as well as incident escalation to some business partners. Minimizes complexity.
Mitigates risk.
Provides scalability.
Reduces cost.
Maximizes business agility.
Enhances the end-user experience.
Enforces comprehensive security.
Easily deployable.
24/7 access to expert engineers.
Portal access for visibility and control. SDWAN enabled WAN aggregation in the datacentre over any last mile to you branch and upstream.
Secure managed Access to NAP Africa and the Teraco exchange.
Managed Interconnects with Tenan s, ISP’s, MPLS providers and Cloud providers (AWS/Azure/GCP).
True Vendor Neutrality.
True Service Provider neutrality.
Access to the full Intelys Managed Services stack
True Freedom of choice of service provider, which allows continual benchmarking across all services on cost, service delivery and technology.
Microsoft Services onramp for private and public access For more information, visit the Intelys website.