South African investors wanting to participate in the EB-5 Investment Programme in order to gain permanent residency – and ultimately citizenship – in the United States can now take advantage of a new partnership between two of the most prominent experts in their fields. The tie-up between property giant, Pam Golding, and SA-based US immigration specialists, American Dream, will leverage the expertise of both organisations to give applicants top-level assistance that will enable them to invest in suitable commercial property ventures in the US. Prospective investors will be able to meet professionals from both companies at roadshows being held in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban. Stuart Ferguson, CEO of American Dream, says the EB-5 Investment Programme offers investors a fast and simple way to make a smart investment, while at the same time acquiring a non-restrictive Green Card and future US citizenship for themselves and their immediate family. “Holders of the EB-5 visa can live anywhere in the US and enjoy the benefits of a stable and strong economy, full employment, a very good standard of living, exceptional medical care, high-quality tertiary education facilities, and friendly people,” he explains. To qualify, the immigration investor must be able to invest at least US$500 000 in a designated Targeted Employment Area (TEA) in a rural region or community with high unemployment. For a person wishing to invest in a non-TEA, the minimum investment threshold is US$1-million. However, long-awaited changes to the EB-5 residency visa are now imminent, so South Africans planning to enter the United States under this popular programme are being advised to lodge their applications as soon as possible. Among the expected changes are an increase in the minimum investment from US$500 000 to US$1,35-million for ventures located within TEAs. For investments situated outside TEAs, the minimum capital contribution will likely rise from US$1-million to US$1,8-million. There may also be changes to the rules that define TEAs and where they are located. Investment in a commercial property venture is an approved strategy for EB-5 visa applicants, says Chris Immelman, head of Pam Golding International. The partnership between Pam Golding and American Dream provides investors with a turnkey service that provides applicants with a sense of comfort and trust, while removing all the stress related with the process, he notes. American Dream, in turn, works with well-known US-based property development companies. These have the required experience, skills and expertise to manage the investments of partners such as American Dream, while providing direct access to ground-up developments that cater for to EB-5 programme. “All the above investment projects are overseen by a group of highly experienced professionals who take care of job creation and overall operation, so there is no need to actively participate in the management of the business,” adds Immelman. As the first organisation to have introduced the EB-5 Programme to South Africa in the late 2000s, American Dream has an exceptional record of having successfully assisted several hundred South African families to obtain their Green Cards through the investment visa method. Furthermore, American Dream is the only EB-5 related entity that has a full-time presence in South Africa. This presence comprises various legal and financial experts who will assist applicants with every aspect of the relocation process. The roadshow presentations will feature experts from Pam Golding and American Dream. Dates and venues are as follows: 20 May – Cape Town 22 May – Durban 23 May – Johannesburg Entrance is free. However, due to high demand, space is limited. To book your place, please email: info@americandream-eb5.com This article was published in partnership with American Dream.