MTN Group has announced that former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas will take over as chairman of the MTN board in December 2019. Jonas, who became the key whistleblower in exposing the Gupta state capture saga in 2017, will take over from long-serving MTN chair and former CEO Phuthuma Nhleko, who is extending his tenure on the board as the transition takes place. “In recent years MTN Group has experienced challenging regulatory environments and highly competitive trading conditions. The MTN Group board of directors has also managed the transition of
senior management during this period,” the group said. “The board is of the view that MTN Group has entered a more stable and settled phase, enabling it to now affect an evolution of the board.” Nhleko, who was anticipated to step down from his position at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 23 May 2019, will step down from the board on 15 December 2019 after overseeing an orderly transition of the board, including the establishment of the International Advisory Board (IAB). Jonas has been appointed Chairman-designate and will assume the position of Chairman of MTN Group effective on 15 December 2019, the group said. Other changes include: Dr. Khotso Mokhele will assume the responsibilities of Lead Independent Director with effect from 15 December 2019.
Further, Alan Harper, Jeff Van Rooyen and Koosum Kaylan will step down from the Board on 15 December 2019 after an orderly transition and handover to incoming directors.
Peter Mageza and Dawn Marole will step down from the Board effective on 30 April 2020. Former president Thabo Mbeki will also be joining the team as head of the aforementioned international advisory board, the company said. “The primary purpose of the IAB will be to counsel, guide and support the MTN Group from time to time in fulfilling its vision and objective of being one of the premier African corporations with a global footprint in telecommunications, contributing to increased digital inclusion in Africa and the Middle East, a pivotal aspect of the fourth industrial revolution,” it said. ‘While the IAB will be non-statutory in nature and not have any fiduciary responsibility, it will make an important contribution and play a highly valued role in ensuring that the Board is guided and assisted in achieving the company’s vision in a technically complex world with uncertain and shifting geopolitical interests.’ The IAB will be chaired by former President of the Republic of South Africa, President Mbeki and be constituted of the following persons: His Excellency President, John Kufuor, former President of Ghana
Dr. Aisha Abdullahi, former African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs
Dr. Mohammed ElBaradei, former Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Dr. Momar Nguer, President of Marketing & Services Total S.A. (France)
Phuthuma Nhleko, Chairman of MTN Group The IAB will commence on 1 July 2019. Read: The best mobile networks in South Africa: MTN vs Vodacom vs Cell C vs Telkom vs Rain