Jobs website, Adzuna, has released a new report on the best entry-level jobs for IT professionals. The report is based on job listings on Adzuna’s website and includes the number of advertisements, as well as the average salary for the role. It also outlines some of the qualifications that you may need for the role, as well as some of the skills that may be required in the position. You can find the list of jobs outlined below. Desktop support technician Number of advertisements:  192
Average salary: R281,895 per year “A good foundation to have for becoming a desktop support technician is a bachelor’s degree in Information Technology, Adzuna said. “You can also get in with a minimum of 5 C-grade GCSEs and a deep passion for solving problems within a fast-paced environment,” it said. “It’s good to equip yourself with certifications like a Microsoft Certified System Engineer (MCSE) and CompTIA A+ if you want to gain insights to the different facets of the business and take the leap to a role like a business analyst.” Junior systems administrator Number of advertisements: 1,078
Average salary: R360,672 A good start for a systems administrator would be to have a bachelor’s degree in computer science, computer engineering or electrical engineering, Adzuna said. “You also need to show a keen interest in network technology and have a passion for keeping up to date with new tech trends, ” it said. “Your drive to figure things out will ensure that you keep learning from your mistakes to help you prepare for the challenges that lie ahead. “Keep equipping yourself with skills like Cisco’s CCNA and administrative languages like Python, Ruby, Windows PowerShell and Perl, and you’ll be able to take the leap to technical lead roles within IT management,” it said. Junior software engineer Number of advertisements: 759
Average salary: R330,285 You’ll need at least a computer science or mathematics bachelor degree to get started as a software engineer, Adzuna said. “You’ll also need a great understanding of computer languages like Java, C++, Oracle, .NET and of course a passion for creating new technologies, ” it said. “The opportunities for growth here are endless as long as you’re able to master a multitude of programming languages and get certified for it. “Once you’re into the swing of things and have a few years of experience, you can take the leap to bigger roles like that of an IT architect or java developer,” it said. Junior business analyst Number of advertisements: 696
Average salary: R241,916 A bachelor’s degree in business analysis, business management or computer science can help you get one foot in the door to become a business analyst, Adzuna said. “You’ll also need a varied set of skills like communication, problem-solving, negotiating skills and a hunger for accepting new challenges, ” it said. “Once you’ve gained some experience and in-job training, you can take the leap and become a business architect or business analyst consultant.” Read: These are the rarest job skills for IT in South Africa right now