The VAT base for electronic services in South Africa was broadened from 1 April 2019, says Seelan Moonsamy, a tax consultant at Baker McKenzie Johannesburg. This means that foreign businesses that supply services to customers by means of an electronic agent, electronic communication or the internet for any consideration would be liable to register for VAT in South Africa, where: A R1 million threshold in any rolling 12 month period is breached; and
Where two of the following circumstances prevail:

if the customer is a resident of South Africa;
if the customer has a postal, business or residential address;
if the payment for such electronic services originates from a bank in South Africa. Types of services Services that are envisaged by the broadening of the VAT base, would include the following: Any reservation services made via an online platform;
Software subscription services;
Broadcasting;
Cloud computing;
Advertising services, or
Gaming. Reservation services “Interestingly, where an online platform charges a facilitation fee for facilitating the booking of accommodation for a South African resident customer (for accommodation inside or outside South Africa), the services supplied by the online platform falls within the ambit of electronic services,”said Moonsamy. “It follows that the platform would have to charge VAT at the rate of 15% on the facilitation fee, notwithstanding the fact that it facilitates the booking of accommodation that is located outside South Africa.” Where a foreign supplier of electronic services provides the services by using the electronic platform of an intermediary, the intermediary will be deemed to be the supplier for VAT purposes, if the intermediary facilitates the supply of the electronic services and is responsible for issuing the invoice and collecting the payment, said Moonsamy. “It follows that the foreign service provider would have no obligation to register for VAT in South Africa. “An intermediary that facilitates the supply of electronic services on behalf of the foreign service provider and outsources the issuing of the invoice and collection of payment to a third party supplier, may still be required to register for VAT in South Africa (if certain conditions are met). Non-Compliance may be costly Moonsamy said that foreign businesses that provide services to South African resident customers (and intermediaries that act on behalf of these foreign businesses, as described) must assess whether it has an obligation to register for VAT in South Africa. “Failure to register for VAT on a timeous basis would lead to penalties and interest being imposed by SARS, and the foreign business and intermediary may also incur reputational damage that may impact its business,” he said. Read: New road taxes and 6 other changes that every South African motorist should know about