Netshield South Africa has revealed the latest iteration of the NVIROMON – the Netshield NVIROMON-ULTI-1S – an enhanced, intelligent IoT enabled environmental monitoring and control gateway. The latest iteration provides users access to a device that offers full IoT enablement, traditional SNMP manageability, as well as enhanced intelligent features to support monitoring and management of connected devices and sensors within any monitoring and control environment. This enables customers to merge and migrate from traditional SNMP managed environments to an industrialised IoT environment. According to Inus Dreckmeyr, CEO at Netshield South Africa, the NVIROMON-ULTI-1S has many benefits. One such benefit is its size, as it only takes 1U rack space, which makes it easy to add into an existing environment. Some of the other benefits include that it can control local events, send alerts, and relay all events – either singularly or simultaneously – through IoT-based and/or SNMP protocols to your IoT/cloud or privately-networked database-based servers for storage and big data analysis. Critically the new NVIROMON-ULTI-1S boasts enhanced features in key areas, which include: Environmental monitoring
Security
Fire systems
Air conditioning/HVAC
Power systems The monitoring and control of the HVAC and air conditioning system can now be done through either a remote IO probe connecting to management contacts, or a protocol conversion probe that connects to the serial interfaces on the device. This removes the various silos created by having independent monitoring solutions for each type of third-party device and gives you a holistic view of all systems in use. You can also monitor and control HVAC and air conditioning systems by monitoring air flow and air conditioner power consumption and then can share the cooling load of each unit by cycling the aircons. With its load sharing feature, it can also measure the power consumed by each system. It gives you full monitoring and control of all your environmental monitoring devices, including environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, fire and even flooding detection, thanks to improved functionality. Security is also enhanced and becomes visible in access control, as the system can monitor and control multiple access doors to environments such as server rooms, highly secure sites and buildings. The device identifies users through connected access controllers such as biometrics, keypads and RFID, and the integration of IP cameras enables snapshots and recording of events. The NVIROMON-ULTI-1S also has fire system monitoring that can now integrate into third party fire panels, while still maintaining the option of adding optional fire detection sensors and solid-state suppression technologies. The fire system monitoring system is also able to send notifications of alerts and events to centralised monitoring stations. From a power perspective the device can be linked to UPSs, PDUs, generators, rectifiers, monitored surge protection elements and other alternative power systems to monitor and read the statuses of these devices, once again relaying alerts and events to centralised monitoring stations. During a critical communication up-link failure the NVIROMON-ULTI-1S makes use of Out-of-Band GSM/LTE (GPRS to 5G) and Lora / Sigfox / NBIoT connectivity technologies to relay all critical alerts and events while buffering all events for relaying on the recovery of up-link connectivity. “In the event of an alarm, or an environmentally triggered event within your datacentre, the system will first establish the user-defined severity. This can be set as either critical, major or minor, and react according to the users defined pre-set procedure. Based on the configuration of the system, it can send automated escalating out-of-band messages such as emails and/or SMS’s directly to your IT teams and then escalate alerts based on the failure of receipt acknowledgements,” said Dreckmeyr. The new NVIROMON-ULTI-1S integrates with a host of third-party systems, and clients can request bespoke decisions and features suited for their environment. Find out more here. This article was published in partnership with Netshield.