Lexis Nexis, in collaboration with many specialist legal practitioners has compiled a useful, easy-to-navigate online tool called Lexis Practical Guidance. The online platform focuses on helping people in any industry to bridge the gap between understanding the law and applying it and includes 30 legal practice areas, which include corporate governance. Corporate governance is key in business as it helps to increase accountability in business and to avoid massive disasters before they occur. It also helps to streamline your operational processes to achieve greater transparency and increased productivity. Practical Guidance Corporate Governance serves as a how-to resource for anyone involved in balancing the many interests of the stakeholders of a corporation – including legal advisors, company secretaries, risk managers and directors – on how to comply with their statutory obligations and to ensure that corporate decisions are in line with best practice. Focusing on the practical issues relating to the Companies Act and the King IV Code on Corporate Governance, Practical Guidance Corporate Governance assists company secretaries in their day-to-day duties, and guides directors on their role within the company. It provides concise guidance and instant clarification on points of law, so they can easily understand what needs to be done and take suitable action. The content is presented in the form of guidance notes, checklists, flowcharts, forms and precedent documents, key cases and legislation. Topics covered include the role and duties of board of directors, liabilities and indemnifying directors and prescribed officers, board code of conduct and code of ethics, and protection and disclosure of information among many others. Additionally, the multitude of practical process aids include personal liability of directors, guidelines on the standard expected of directors, actions for which directors may not be indemnified, examples of board powers commonly limited in the memorandum of incorporation, and many more. All in all, you will have access to 43 topic overviews, over 125 guidance notes, including practical process aids, up-to-date judgements for reference, and over 130 customisable forms, precedents, and checklists. It is like having your own specialist legal practitioner on your desktop. For more information or a free demo visit: lexisnexis.co.za/ractical-guidance/corporate-governance. This article was published in partnership with LexisNexis.