South African IT service provider Turrito has made strategic changes within its group of companies. The promotions and moves Turrito, said, aligns with the group’s growth trajectory despite a challenging economic environment. Brian Timperley moves to the Sebata ICT Group board as CEO, bringing tremendous experience and expertise in the local ICT sector. Timperley co-founded Turrito Networks and was part of the management team that grew the business into a R180m Telecoms leader. Delivering connectivity and cloud services to over 700 corporates, education and financial institutions as well as over 50 municipalities throughout South Africa, Timperley will continue his role on the board of Turrito as CEO. Louis Jardim moves to the Sebata ICT Group board as chief operations officer, bringing over 18 years of ICT experience and having jointly founded the Turrito business and its subsidiaries. “Louis has been paramount to the operational success of the business since inception and continues his role at Turrito as COO,” the group said. Colin Thornton assumes the role of managing director at Turrito, with over 20 years of technology and Managed Service experience and founding the Dial a Nerd business in 1998. Thornton’s role will encompass all of Turrito’s divisions including Networks, MSP, Analytics, GSM and the CloudGate and CloudWare technologies. Aaron Thornton, who brings over 18 years of experience in Managed Services and IT Support, takes the reins as MD of Dial a Nerd, returning the business to its SOHO and Consumer market focus. Kumaran Gopaul has been promoted to sales manager, broadening his responsibilities across Turrito’s various divisions, and driving the organisations sales strategy. Ashika Desai, Turrito’s financial manager, takes on the added responsibilities of all Turrito’s new divisions, including Business Analytics, GSM and the CloudWare & CloudGate divisions. Ruasha Bachan joins the board of directors at Turrito, bringing her extensive HR experience and acumen to the group. Ruasha has been working with Turrito and its subsidiaries for almost 10 years. Read: Dial a Nerd in merger deal with Turrito Networks