Good Governance Africa (GGA) has published its index on the best and worst run municipalities in South Africa. The index ranks 213 local municipalities from best to worst based on how they deliver across three main indicators: quality of administration, economic development, and service delivery. It found that Mossel Bay municipality is the best-run municipality in the country, followed by the Senqu municipality in the Eastern Cape. Of the top 20 municipalities, 12 are in the Western Cape, and 11 are run by the Democratic Alliance, with four others being DA/other party coalitions. Mossel Bay Charles de Kock, owner of the Chas Everitt International franchise in Mossel Bay, said that the performance of local authorities is becoming an important location consideration for South African home buyers. “They want reliable access to things like health services, libraries and sports facilities as well as good schools and public transport, and they don’t want to be left in the dark or without water because the municipality has failed to maintain or repair its infrastructure,” he said. “In short, the buyers are going where the service is good and they reckon the municipal utility charges and rates to be fair. “A preference for environments that are perceived as safer, cleaner and better run than many city suburbs has been manifesting for quite some time in the familiar ‘semigration’of families to certain country and coastal towns while their breadwinners become weekly ‘super-commuters’.” “It has also driven the increasing popularity of large and well-run security estates which are often effectively independent of whatever services their local authorities may or may not provide,” he said. De Kock said that there is significant variance in the cost of homes in the area, with properties available in every price range. “There are one-bedroom apartments available here from around R375,000, two-bedroom units from around R500,000, and three-bedroom units from around R900,000,” he said. “Townhouse prices start at about R1 million for three-bedroom units and range up to about R4.5 million for luxury units right on the beachfront in Dana Bay or Pinnacle Point Estate. “Prices for suburban family homes with three bedrooms and two bathrooms start at around R1.1 million and those for estate homes range from around R1.9 million in Mossel Bay Golf Estate all the way up to about R8 million in some of the newer developments like Village on Sea, Moquini and Springerbaai.” Read: This is what happened to the South African property market after the last five elections