Huawei has reacted to Google’s announcement that it will be suspending business with the technology firm as part of an ongoing trade war between the Trump administration and China. Reuters reported that Google had suspended business with Huawei that requires the transfer of hardware and software products except those covered by open source licenses. The news has caused concern among Huawei customers about how their smartphones would work with Google apps including Gmail, YouTube, and Chrome. However, Huawei said that it will continue to provide security updates and after-sales services to all existing Huawei and Honor smartphone and tablet products, covering those that have been sold and that are still in stock globally. “We will continue to build a safe and sustainable software ecosystem, in order to provide the best experience for all users globally,” Huawei said. “As one of Android’s key global partners, we have worked closely with their open-source platform to develop an ecosystem that has benefitted both users and the industry.” “We are complying with the order and reviewing the implications. “For users of our services, Google Play and the security protections from Google Play Protect will continue to function on existing Huawei devices.” Markets Bloomberg reports that the impact of the Trump administration’s threats to choke Huawei Technologies Co reverberated across the global supply chain on Monday, hitting some of the biggest component-makers. Germany’s Infineon Technologies AG fell in early trading Monday after the Nikkei reported it halted shipments to the Chinese company in the wake of the US ban. Shares of STMicroelectronics NV were also hit. The share-price falls follow US corporations freezing the supply of critical software and components to China’s largest technology company, in order to comply with White House orders. Chipmakers including Intel Corp, Qualcomm Inc, Xilinx Inc and Broadcom Inc have told their employees they will not supply Huawei till further notice, according to people familiar with their actions. The Trump administration on Friday blacklisted Huawei – which it accuses of aiding Beijing in espionage – and threatened to cut it off from the US software and semiconductors it needs to make its products. Read: Google terminates Huawei’s Android licences