Seacom says it will add eight new Points of Presence (PoPs) across Africa, allowing more businesses to connect to cloud facilities globally, as well as to the continent’s first Microsoft Azure data centres in Johannesburg and Cape Town. The group has extended its presence in its brand-new icolo data centre in Mombasa, Kenya. This full-service facility acts as an on-ramp to Seacom’s network, providing better support to service provider and enterprise customers in the country. The Mombasa PoP is also significant as it connects Kenya’s first truly open-access data centre onto the Seacom open-access data network, the company said. “Rare in the region, in comparison to operator-owned data centres, these carrier-neutral facilities encourage competition in the local ICT sphere, helping to increase cloud-based service offerings for customers while driving down costs,” Seacom said. It said that it has similar plans for new open-access PoPs that are coming in Nairobi and Kampala. In preparation for higher demand and expanded services to business customers in the region, the company said it has upgraded its backhaul connecting Mombasa to these new PoPs to include four separate and resilient routes. South Africa Seacom said that is is also deploying a new PoP within the carrier-neutral Teraco Bredell data centre in South Africa. “This new facility is a key location, catering specifically to content providers and enterprise customers,” said Robert Marston, global head of product at Seacom. “It will also serve as an important data recovery site for many operators,” he said. Seacom said that its recent acquisition of FibreCo has added more than 60 network nodes across its South African network – including six core PoPs in major metros – vastly extending its reach. “The moves that Seacom is making to improve our infrastructure on the continent will benefit African companies with greater high-speed, reliable and secure connectivity to cloud services and other online tools, said Marston. “One of our major objectives is to add simplicity to cloud migrations wherever possible.” Read: Microsoft data centres will create 100,000 new jobs in South Africa