Huawei officials underlined the benefits of a smart connected city at the 2019 Shenzhen Smart City Forum, with rapid progress being made in how cities collect and use bid data. The forum aims to promote communication and cooperation in building smart, digital cities, with MMC for economic development at City of Johannesburg, Leah Knott, attending the event, held at the Shangri-La Hotel Shenzhen on Tuesday. “Huawei is dedicated to building a smart city digital foundation that enables integrating, exploring, analyzing, and sharing data, by using ubiquitous connectivity, a digital platform, and pervasive intelligence,” said Huawei rotating chairman Guo Ping in a speech entitled ‘Building a Maslow Model for Smart Cities’. “More importantly, we develop a digital brain for cities in hand with application partners, building a common ecosystem with mutual advantages. This brain will provide advanced ways to help cities make informed development decisions and will allow e-government, transportation, and policing domains to go digital. “In doing so, we hope to build smart cities featuring smart administration, more benefits for residents, and prosperous industry development.” “Innovative technologies, including 5G, IoT, AI, and cloud, are disruptively renovating how cities are governed and managed. By nurturing Public-Private-People Partnerships, a co-creation model among government, corporations, and citizens, smart cities will facilitate a more open decision-making process, and bring a people-centric new world,” said Smart City Expo World Congress CEO, Ugo Valenti. A panel of smart city experts explored a number of emerging technologies, how to construct big-data-based city ICT infrastructure to safeguard public security and order, and how to enhance modern city governance, public welfare, and economy by leveraging digital services and a disruptive digital brain. “The usage of digital technology has become one of the criteria to assess a city’s intelligence level,” said Yan Lida, president of Huawei Enterprise BG. Future smart cities will have five new infrastructural platforms, namely cloud, IoT, data lake, AI, and a video surveillance network. These five platforms will form a foundation for us to achieve ubiquitous connectivity, realise pervasive intelligence, and streamline heterogeneous ICT systems, Lida said. “Huawei uses its cloud as the basis to integrate various new ICT technologies, such as AI, IoT, big data, converged communications, video, and GIS, to build a comprehensive digital platform.” Guo Ping pointed out that through smart city  adoption, the government in Shenzhen has reduced face-to-face related services, with as many as 80 services now done exclusively through computer programmes. He pointed out that smart cities require ubiquitous connectivity. He said that an intelligent brain is when all data, traffic, security and the like, can be aggregated in real time, for those in power to make informed, smart decisions. Data can be analysed and leveraged, and even monetised for economic benefit. Read: 2019 Huawei Shenzhen Smart City Forum – Photos