Considerable changes are in store for both drivers of company vehicles and fleet operators when South Africa’s new Aarto Act officially comes into effect. This is according to managing director of MasterDrive, Eugene Herbert, who said that the new law and accompanying demerit system will require adjustments from any person or business that currently makes a living by driving on the country’s roads. “A proxy needs to be appointed who keeps track of drivers and subsequent fines,” he said. “While that proxy cannot be held personally responsible for the fines, it is an infringement to not keep track of drivers and reassign the fines to the correct driver.” Herbert said that future and past employment contracts need to now also contain a clause that allows you to receive information on your employees’ infringements. “If an employee’s license is suspended as a result of fines obtained in their work as well personal capacity, yet they continue to drive for your company, the company can also be held responsible for this. Points system Herbert said that the new law will also require a change in driver behaviour. “If you tend to receive a fair deal of infringements, now is the time to change your driver behaviour. “The consequences of bad driving behaviour are considerably more serious if it can result in suspension of your driving license, and consequently, your ability to earn an income,” he said, When facing infringements, drivers also need to know what the process is following this, Herbert said. “Aarto does allow drivers to have points removed from their record. If you depend on your driving license in order to earn an income, clearing your record following infringements is vital. “With much panic about the implementation of Aarto, employers will also find it in their best interest to educate and upskill their drivers.” “A proclamation was signed this weekend so motorists and businesses can expect more clarity on Aarto’s implementation soon. Be sure that your business is ready for it when the bill comes into effect.” Read: South Africa’s new demerit system is now law – this is what you earn points for 