Taxi-hailing group Uber is celebrating its sixth year in South Africa, and has released some insightful stats on the service in the country – including the most travelled-to destinations, and the longest trip recorded in the last year. Uber launched in South Africa in 2013, operating in Johannesburg and Cape Town. It now has 13,000 drivers in six cities across the country, serving one million active customers. “Uber has travelled 9.14 million kilometres in South Africa – with just one driver contributing over 38,775 trips to this figure, a true sign of how Uber has increased access to transportation for more South Africans,” the group said. The most visited destinations using the Uber service includes airports in the main metros, as well as museums and other locations often frequented by tourists. The longest recorded mileage was a 569 km trip from Port Elizabeth to East London  – which at current rates costs between R2,000 and R2,500. These were the most-visited destinations: Joburg: O.R. Tambo International Airport and Lanseria), Gold Reef City, Sandton Market @ the Park, Gautrain, Sandton City;
Cape Town: Cape Town International Airport , Waterfront Cape Wheel, Silo Zeitz Museum, Table Mountain, Company Gardens;
Durban: King Shaka International Airport, Gateway, Ushaka, Durban North Beach, Oyster Box Hotel. Nduduzo Nyanda, country manager for South Africa stated that the group’s growth in South Africa has been “phenomenal”. “Without a doubt, Uber has remained committed to being a collaborative, supportive partner that gets customers to the ‘last mile’ in more ways than one. This can be seen by the airport being one of the most visited destinations across Cape Town, Durban and Johannesburg. “We can also see that Uber remains vital to getting locals and tourists to key heritage and iconic spots across our main cities as Gold Reef City (Johannesburg), Waterfront Cape Wheel and Table Mountain (Cape Town) and Ushaka Marine World and the Durban North Beach, have become some of the most visited spots in the last year.” Read: A look at Uber’s new passenger drone 