Pick n Pay has reopened its flagship store On Nicol after a comprehensive revamp. The retailer said that the outlet will be one of its signature next-generation stores which are designed to offer an improved shopping experience for customers. The store includes a number of new speciality areas including sections focusing on freshly squeezed juice, a chocolatier, and a dedicated coffee station. It also includes a PnP pharmacy, which offers a full range of clinic services. Pick n Pay said that it has 26 next-generation stores in the pipeline with early customer feedback being overwhelmingly positive.   New features You can find some of the most notable new store features below: Dedicated plastic and packaging-free fresh produce zone – The store has extended its Nude Wall offering to include 12 new seasonal loose PnP fruit and vegetables. This brings the total nude offering to 24 products. Free paper bags are provided for customers. Alternatively, customers can purchase a PnP reusable netted fresh-produce bags (R7,00) or bring their own clear and sealable container; Bakery – The store’s premium in-store bakery range will include freshly baked artisanal and speciality breads and rolls, as well as a new range of Viennoiserie and patisserie items; Fishmonger – Includes sustainably sourced fish and taste bud-tempting frozen options, with a fresh mussel and oyster bar; Prepared food section – Includes a range of ready-to-eat goods, from a fish and chip grill to a new chicken rotisserie section and made to order Burger Grill Bar.   Chocolatier station with local artisanal handcrafted chocolate – Pick n Pay has partnered with local, bean-to-bar chocolatier, CocoaFair, to showcase and sell their world-class chocolates that are produced using beans sourced directly from farmers and hand-packaged by communities; Wellness Zone: This area will offer customers access to  patient care from PnP pharmacy staff and provide a full range of clinic services through the MyLife Healthcare Centre. The Wellness Zone will also carry the latest trending range of health ingredients from superfoods, plant proteins and healthy snacks, as well as health equipment including yoga mats and weights. A new customised wine cellar: With over 800 wines including nearly 100 new wines, a range of sulphur-free organic wines, limited artisan wine ranges made by independent winemakers and wines exclusively made for Pick n Pay by L’Avenir, Le Bonheur and Kaapzicht wineries from Stellenbosch. The Growler Bar: Located in the liquor store, the Growler Barin the liquor store will allow customers to fill a 2L glass Growler bottle with fresh draught craft beer to enjoy at home; New services: The store has added to its current range of services offered at the store to include “party services” for its Liquor store customers. This includes free glass rental and delivery for orders over R3,000. Customers will also continue to have access to PnP’s money counter which hosts a wide range of value-added services, such as bill payments, flights and Webtickets, and financial services offerings, such as TymeBank and PnP Money Transfers. Read: Pick n Pay appoints new chief financial officer 