The UK wants to introduce points-based immigration system once the country leaves the European Union. In a speech at the Conservative Party’s annual conference in Manchester on Tuesday, interior minister Priti Patel said: “at this defining moment in our country’s history, I have a particular responsibility when it comes to taking back control – it is to end the free movement of people once and for all. Instead we will introduce an Australian-style points-based immigration system.” Patel’s speech said that an immigration system would be implemented to serve the best interests of Britain. “One that attracts and welcomes the brightest and the best. One that supports brilliant scientists, the finest academics and leading people in their fields. And one that is under the control of the British Government.” Australia’s point system is designed to target migrants who have skills or outstanding abilities so as to contribute meaningfully to the country’s economy, and filling any labour shortages. Most skilled visas for immigration to Australia require applicants to score a minimum number of points on the Points Test. Points are awarded in a number of categories which are considered attractive qualities, including the following: Age requirements;
Competency in English;
Skilled Employment;
Educational Qualifications. A growing number of South Africans have left the country in recent years, citing a host reasons including rising crime and unemployment rates, affirmative action, deterioration in social services, a decline in living standards, in the quality of life, a deterioration in education standards, and rising tax rates. The general negative sentiment in the country, following the ‘Zuma years’ sparked the creation of a #ImStaying Facebook group ‘dedicated to the South African women and men of all races and all religions, who remain loyal to South Africa’. The page has garnered in excess of 460,000 members since launching less than a month ago, with people sharing their stories about why they choose to stay in South Africa. Read: More skilled black professionals are leaving South Africa 