Pick n Pay’s planning for Black Friday 2019 began straight after the shopping holiday ended last year, with the retailer working to gauge what customers most enjoyed, and how it can improve its shopping experience. Speaking to BusinessTech John Bradshaw, retail executive: marketing at Pick n Pay, said that the store plans months in advance with its suppliers to ensure that it has the right stock available, at the right prices, in the right quantities across the right stores. “Logistically, we also make arrangements for extra deliveries to stores over the weekend and add extra delivery and collection slots to our online shop,” he said. “We increase our staffing complement in stores to manage deliveries, assist customers on the floor and ensure that every till point is open to minimise queue times.” Bradshaw said that Pick n Pay’s online team is also bolstered to process online orders so that customers can enjoy their purchases as soon as possible. Not only one day In 2018 Pick n Pay offered different Black Friday deals at different times throughout November – all of which culminated on Black Friday and ran throughout the weekend It also offered weekly online-only deals for customers. “Customers really enjoyed the weekly online deals as they got more great deals throughout the month, and not just for one day,” said Bradshaw. “Customers can expect similar opportunities to get their favourite items. Customers can watch our social media platforms more information about this leading up to Black Friday, or sign for Pick n Pay’s Black Friday deals alert which is now live.” Bradshaw added that Pick n Pay conducted a Black Friday trail run on 27 September to test its systems and supply chain delivery. Popular products “Last year we offered a range of products from fresh and edible foods to household items and favourite electronics and appliance items,” said Bradshaw. “In our supermarket stores, we found that customers used the Black Friday deals as an opportunity to refill their pantries. “Popular items included long-life milk, oil, rice, washing powder and toilet paper. In our hypermarkets, televisions and kitchen appliances were a favourite amongst customers.” Liquor and clothing deals were also popular with customers, he said. Read: Pick n Pay is having a Black Friday trial run 