Halloween isn’t just about kids in costumes eating too many sweets – it’s also about sleeping with all the lights on because you’re suddenly terrified of clowns all over again. Here are the most frightening things to watch online this year.  Based on the bestselling novel by the master of horror, Stephen King, It is the highest-grossing horror movie of all time. It tells the story of a group of bullied kids in a small Maine town in the summer of 1989, who must band together against one of horror’s most terrifying villains, Pennywise, a shape-shifting clown who preys on children. Watch this one because it’s genuinely good – 86% on Rotten Tomatoes! – and because it’ll ensure you never go to the circus again. Stream on Showmax now »  When a woman dies, her daughter’s family begins to unravel increasingly terrifying secrets about her life. The more they discover, the more they find themselves trying to outrun the sinister fate they seem to have inherited. Watch this because it stars Toni Colette, who won a gloriously named Fangoria Chainsaw Award for her role, and because it scored 89% on Rotten Tomatoes, where it’s called a ‘harrowing, uncommonly unsettling horror film whose cold touch lingers long beyond the closing credits.” Stream on Showmax now » Also Watch: Hell Fest, Scout’s Guide to Zombie Apocalypse, The Addams Family, Pet Sematary A band of survivors fights to stay alive and find safety after the zombie apocalypse. Sheriff Rick Grimes wakes up from a coma to find his town littered with corpses and overrun with walkers, and his wife and son missing. Binge this one because the cast have raked in a slew of awards over the many seasons of this blockbuster show, and also in case you ever have to face a real zombie onslaught, so you’ll know what to do. Stream on Showmax now »  Who’d have thought it was possible for American Horror Story to get freakier with each passing season? Follow the trail of horror when you dare to binge seven seasons of AHS. If you have to pick one, try Hotel, the sixth instalment. It’s based on a real Chicago hotel built in 1893 by serial killer HH Holmes, which came to be known as Murder Castle. Lady Gaga won a Golden Globe as the Countess, the hotel’s vampire overseer who hosts a series of homicidal residents. If that weren’t enough, watch it to see Kathy Bates and Sarah Paulson, Angela Basset, Gabourey Sibide, Chloë Sevigny and more famous faces. American Horror Story S1-7 If you prefer your Halloween scares on the silly side, check out this cult favourite mockumentary series from New Zealand comedy geniuses Jemaine Clement (Legion, Flight of the Conchords) and Oscar nominee Taika Waititi (Thor: Ragnarok). Based on the 2014 movie of the same name, the series follows a group of vampire roomies who’ve been living together for over a century in New York’s Staten Island – plenty of time to get on each other’s nerves. It made it on to Rotten Tomatoes’ list of the best TV shows of 2019, and it stars BAFTA winners Matt Berry (The IT Crowd, Toast of London) and Kayvan Novak (Facejacker) as Nandor the Relentless and Laszlo respectively, with Taika, Jemaine and Jonny Brugh as guest star, reprising their roles from the original film as Viago, Vladislav and Deacon. Look out for cameos from many of your favourite vampires, including Evan Rachel Wood (True Blood), Danny Trejo (From Dusk Till Dawn), Wesley Snipes (Blade), Paul Reubens (Buffy The Vampire Slayer) and Oscar winner Tilda Swinton (Only Lovers Left Alive). Stream it on Showmax from 31 October » Also watch: HBO’s Los Espookys, The Strain, The Twilight Zone More freaky stuff to watch: There are plenty more movies and series to check out in Showmax’s 31 Nights of Scares collection. Sign up for a 14-day free trial at Showmax.com. Thereafter, access to a tonne of local and international series, movies and documentaries costs just R99 per month. DStv Premium subscribers get Showmax at no extra cost – just go to the website to sign up. DStv Compact and Compact Plus subscribers can add Showmax to their subscription for just R49pm.  This article was published in partnership with Showmax.