Large retailer Checkers has launched a new rewards programme, called Xtra Savings. The programme is the group’s answer to Pick n Pay’s SmartShopper and Woolworths’ WRewards, but aims to reverse the typical reward trend. While most rewards schemes are based on earning points and earning loyalty rewards, or being placed into different tiers based on spending habits, Xtra Savings opts for delivering “instant cash savings” on items purchased, Checkers said. “There are no points. No tiers. No levels. Just instant cash savings on your groceries and drinks,” it said. Checkers said that it is partnering with brands, which will deliver specific discounts or cash values on purchases. By way of an example, the group said that members could get 35% off washing powder, or R1,000 of top-tier whiskey, “and everything in between”. The programme gives shoppers extra cash savings on more than 1,000 products every month, with card holders only needing to swipe their card and save at the till. Discounts will be clearly marked in store, and every saving automatically reflects on the till slip, it said. It also promises personalised offers, special perks, previews of promotions like Black Friday and automatic entries into competitions. “The success of the Xtra Savings Programme will be in its simplicity,” said Neil Schreuder, chief of strategy and innovation for the group. “Loyalty cards with slow-earning points are everywhere. Consumers know the game. They want transparent incentives. They want meaningful gratification. And that’s what we’re giving them.” Customers can sign up for Xtra Savings for free in-store (Checkers, Checkers Hyper or Checkers Liquorshop) or by using paperless channels. This includes: Add Checkers (+27-87-240-5385) as a WhatsApp contact and say “Hi!”
Scan the QR code on the back of your Xtra Savings card (available in store) and sign up online
Dial *134*835*CARDNUMBER# and follow the prompts
Download the Checkers app from your app store. Read: More South Africans are turning to loyalty programmes to save money – these are 5 of the best ones right now 