Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its latest jobs index, showing which skills are in the greatest demand in South Africa right now. The CareerJunction Index (CJI) represents online labour dynamics in South Africa by providing a detailed analysis of the relative ratio of supply and demand in the online job market. It is based on comprehensive data gathered from the CareerJunction website. The index increased to 106 index points during September – indicating a less competitive environment for job seekers. While demand decrease by 3%, job search activity slowed by 9%. “As a result of the national school holidays in September, job search activity slowed, creating a favourable environment for job seekers,” the group said. “The marketing, ICT and business & management sectors saw a notable uptake in jobs since July 2019. “The engineering and construction sectors as well as the sales and cleaning, maintenance & repair sectors, on the other hand, have seen a decreasing demand trend.” Trending jobs Below are the jobs that are currently trending in the country, along with what people can earn in the respective fields. Staff Recruitment/Selection Average salary offerings for intermediate level position: GP: R14,265 to R19,375 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R12,300 to R16,800 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: N/A Software Development Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R34,490 to R49,720 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R33,110 to R 44,262 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: N/A Bookkeeping Average salary offerings for an intermediate level position: GP: R16,625 to R20,593 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R16,574 to R18,556 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: N/A CareerJunction identified the following three skills as being in the highest demand: Software Development: Software Development remains the most sought-after skill set on CareerJunction. Demand for software developers increased by 11% quarter-on-quarter; Middle/Department Management: Professionals in management face positive employment prospects. After a decrease in hiring activity for middle management staff during the second quarter of 2019, demand has stabilised; Representative/Sales Consulting: Despite a slowing trend in recruitment activity for sales staff, sales representatives remain high in demand. Supply and Demand  An overview of vacancy levels across various sectors (indicated by the demand graph) provides a good indication of where the majority of employment takes place, CareerJunction said. “The IT, business & management and finance sectors are undoubtedly the most sought after sectors, followed by the sales, admin, office & support and architecture & engineering sectors, among others, listed.” When looking at active job seekers across various sectors (indicated by the supply graph), areas of high supply correlate closely to areas of high demand, however, supply outstrips demand in some areas, leading to a competitive environment for job seekers. The opposite is seen for some industries, CareerJunction said. “The engineering and construction sectors, as well as the sales and cleaning, maintenance & repair sectors, have seen a significant drop in labour demand after an increase in demand during the first quarter of 2019.” Read: 5 unusual job titles in South Africa 