The Department of Home Affairs is working on a number of changes to South Africa’s visa regime, in an effort to make the country more accessible for visitors, investors and people with skills that are critical to building the economy. Presenting at the monthly Presidential Working Committee on Monday (7 October), Home Affairs minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi said that his department has lowered turnaround times for critical work skills visas, which are now issued within four weeks in 88.5% of applications. By comparison, business and general work visas are issued within eight weeks in 98% of applications. “In November, the Department of Home Affairs will embark on a pilot scheme for the issuing of e-visas, which applicants will be able to access online, eliminating the need for applicants to visit South African missions abroad. “The department has also located visa services within the offices of various investment facilitation agencies around the country. “In addition, visa requirements have been simplified for countries such as China and India, which are key markets for tourism to South Africa,” he said. New countries can now visit South Africa visa-free Motsoaleid added that the government also recently waived visas for travellers from Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, New Zealand, Cuba, Ghana and Sao Tome and Principe. In July, a spokesperson told BusinessTech that the Department of Home Affairs will also enter into talks with their counterparts in a number of countries to allow visa-free access for South African travellers. While countries such as Qatar and Ghana already have visa-free or visa on arrival agreements with South Africa, it would be considered a serious boon if South Africans could travel visa-free to countries such as the UAE and New Zealand. Department spokesperson Siya Qoza said that Home Affairs was currently in talks with these countries on two main issues. “We have entered negotiations with these countries with the first priority being an implementation date for visa-free access to South Africa. “Once this has been confirmed, our second priority is reciprocity.” Qoza said that initial conversations held with these countries have been positive, with talks expected to be concluded by September. He added that Home Affairs may expand these negotiations to other countries. “We are consistently looking at which countries would be of a trade and tourism benefit to South Africa,” he said. Read: The visa-free countries you can travel to on a South African passport 