Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Former DA leader Helen Zille’s recent past may come back to haunt her, and stifle her bid to regain control of the party, with the DA reportedly seeking legal advice on whether she is eligible to apply for the position of Federal Chair. The hiccup comes from an agreement Zille made with the party following a spate of controversial tweets, where she agreed to step down from all structures of the party. The agreement may still be in effect. [Business Day – paywall] More revelations about the EFF’s ties to the looting of VBS bank, this time uncovering how R500,000 was spent on a wedding for the party’s second in command, Floyd Shivambu. Daily Maverick’s investigative team Scorpio has analysed thousands of transactions between Shivambu and a slash fund managed by a company tied to his brother, Brian. [Daily Maverick] SA Communist Party head Blade Nzimande says that the National Minimum Wage should be applied across all sectors, noting that about a third of all workers in the country are not earning the current NMW at around R3,500 a month. Upon the implementation of the NMW some sectors were given rates lower than the base of R20 per hour. Nzimande claimed wages have kept going down over the last 20 years, while bosses took millions home. [EWN] SAA’s catering subsidiary Air Chefs says it has made contingency plans to ensure that food services on flights are not interrupted, and that passengers won’t have to pack their own lunches should they be flying today. This was in response to unions representing striking workers, who warned passengers to pack their own lunches. Numsa wants to strike over unpaid bonuses for chefs. [Media24] The rand managed to gain some decent ground as the flurry of poor data from the US drives sentiment for a potential rate cut by the Fed. Attention now shifts towards the US-China trade dynamic, with officials set to meet on 11th October, while the data calendar for today has little worth noting. On Monday the rand was at R15.08 to the dollar, R18.59 to the pound and R16.56 to the euro.