More and more, today’s competitive business landscape understands the importance of human capital as a critical differentiating factor. To achieve top and bottom line growth, you need to maximise productivity levels within your business, streamline processes and remove errors that are both costly and impact the overall efficiency of your organisation. You also want your human capital to have the time to focus on growth initiatives and servicing your customers. In short, to get the most from your people, you need to create a hybrid workforce that combines human capital with process automation — people and robots working together to maximise the organization’s overall potential. Click here to unlock the full potential of your human capital While there has never been a greater understanding of the importance of engaged employees, across the world satisfaction and engagement levels are nowhere near where they should be, and South Africa is no exception. The problem is that employers tend to focus on satisfaction ratings, without understanding that having employees who are simply ‘satisfied’ at work could actually be damaging their entire company’s productivity levels. According to research conducted by Bain & Co consultants Eric Garton and Michael Mankins, ‘satisfied’ employees are 45% less productive than engaged employees, and engaged employees are 55% less productive than inspired employees. That makes inspired employees 125% more productive than satisfied employees. And unfortunately, less than one third of employees are either engaged or inspired. The reality is that employees who fall into the ‘satisfied’ category are actually a drain on productivity levels. So, the question becomes, how do you create workers that are more engaged and inspired, and in doing so increase productivity levels? While there are many contributing factors to this question, one of the biggest changes that has occurred in the workplace today is an enormous increase in data and processes. Repetitive, routine and mundane tasks sap the energy and motivation of employees who want to be focusing their time and attention on more meaningful work. And it’s not just employees that dislike process-driven, dull tasks. When processes are too reliant on manual intervention, bottlenecks and time-wasting tasks are introduced. Additional controls are also required to compensate for issues introduced through human error, which slows the whole process down even further, makes it more expensive and adds an additional layer of frustrations for employees. It’s a downward spiral. Employees steadily become less and less motivated as more and more time is spent on process instead of client-facing meetings, customer service, innovation and other high-value tasks that automation can’t solve. The good news is automation can solve the process and data problems we’ve listed above. The challenge, according to Ravin Jesuthasan and John Boudreau, the authors of Reinventing Jobs: A 4 Step Approach for Applying Automation to Work, is that leaders focus too much on how automation will replace jobs, instead of how work will be redefined with the organization to increase productivity, engagement and the top and bottom line. They believe there is a four-step approach to understanding whether automation can help your business (and its workforce). To find out more about how you can unlock human potential through Hybrid Workforces that blend human capital with automation, download your free whitepaper, Unlock the full potential of your most valuable resources: Your employees and your data.  This article was published in partnership with Hybrid Workforces.