Poor cellular signal can be one of the most frustrating struggles in South Africa. It can cause dropped calls, and can also make surfing the Internet frustrating, as your Internet connection is continuously fluctuating in quality. Call Inteto Connect to learn more about how WilsonPro cellphone boosters can improve your cellular signal This is why cellular boosters are incredibly valuable – whether you’re a home user, work in a large office, or need connectivity while in your vehicle. The below image explains how cellular boosters work.  If you are interested in investing in a cellular booster – be it for your home, business, or even vehicle – you should look no further than WilsonPro. WilsonPro cellular boosters offer fantastic improvements to cellular connectivity, and are distributed exclusively by Bolton Technical in Southern Africa. Inteto Connect now also sells and installs WilsonPro cellphone boosters in combination with their high-quality Poynting antennas to South African customers. Some of the most popular WilsonPro products that are available from Bolton Technical and Inteto Connect include the following: The WilsonPro A500 is a 50 Ohm cellular booster that boosts voice and text, as well as 2G, 3G, and 4G data. The A500 offers coverage for your typical home size of up to 500 square metres, and can be used with all of your cellular devices across any of South Africa’s mobile networks. Supported devices include smartphones, tablets, notebooks, and hotspots. The WilsonPro A500 is the most popular choice for home usage due to its affordable price point and impressive performance. The AH100-Pro is an ideal solution for when you need coverage in an area that extends up to 125 square meters. It’s a good starter kit if you have decent outside signal however won’t cover your typical sized home, but rather ideal for a “spot” coverage situation for a single-office, home office or other small area. The AH100-Pro is set to be the best value signal booster for small area coverage when launched later this year. The WilsonPro A1000 is WilsonPro’s most powerful commercial cell phone signal booster and is therefore the perfect solution for businesses and offices. It supports multiple users and networks at the same time and can offer great connectivity in buildings and offices for a range of up to 1,000 square metres. This is why the WilsonPro A1000 is the recommended product for most office or commercial buildings. Soon to launch in South Africa is the weBoost AM100-Pro, which is designed for users who need connectivity on the go. It is easy to install in vehicles such as cars, bakkies, trucks, caravans, and even boats. It can support up to four smartphones, and can also be used in an area of up to 125 square metres – which makes it double as useful for small offices or residences. The AM100-Pro is expected to launch before the end of 2019, and is expected to shake up the vehicle signal booster market.  WilsonPro’s cellphone boosters can be used with various Poynting antennas, and the choice of which antenna to use will depend on your specific situation and requirements. There are two main types of antennas – Omni antennas and directional antennas. Omni antennas can work with cellular signal coming from all directions, which is great if you’re in an area that has multiple base stations within range. This is because if one base station is offering poor signal, you can instead automatically get signal from a different station. It is also easier to install than a directional antenna as you don’t need to work out the exact direction of a base station for it to operate efficiently. This also means that you won’t need to readjust your antenna if a site is shut down, or if a new, closer site is developed. The downside to this antenna type is that it is less efficient, and offers slower throughput, in undercovered areas. Directional antennas focus on one specific direction, which results in improved connectivity from sites at which it is pointed. This makes it a great choice if you only have a single site in range, and if the quality of signal is not great – as you will be able to get better reception from weaker sites. However, it is more difficult to install, as it needs to be directly aligned with the targeted cell tower, and if this tower suffers issues, you will not be able to switch cell towers without manually adjusting the antenna. It is worth noting that it is possible to combine both omni and directional antennas into a single MIMO configuration – which will lessen the disadvantages of both antenna types. Contact exclusive South African distributor Bolton Technical today to learn more about how you can become a WilsonPro reseller, or contact Inteto Connect at 012 657 0050 if you would like to purchase these products or have them installed anywhere in Southern Africa.  This article was published in partnership with Poynting Direct.