Black Friday has grown to be an incredibly important ‘shopping holiday’ for South African retailers with Game and Builders reporting a 24% and 33% sales increase over the period in 2018. Makro alone, made its first R200 million within 15 hours on day one which is equivalent to what some of our online competitors made for the entire Black Friday trading period, a Massmart spokesperson told BusinessTech. “In total, in 2018 we reported group sales of R1.8 Billion over the three day (Friday-Sunday) Black Friday period,” Massmart said. The group added that a recent GeoPoll survey found that Game and Makro are perceived to have the best Black Friday deals. “The survey that was conducted nationally in August, polled 1000 consumers who are aged 25 years old and up, belong to LSM 5-10 and are primary household purchasers. “50% of the survey respondents said they shop at Massmart stores over Black Friday with 70% of those respondents saying that Game is their first choice destination for Black Friday deals.” Plans Massmart said that every year it conducts a  post-Black Friday review, looking at what did and didn’t work for the group’s various stores. “Something’s that worked well last year, which we will continue, include Uber in partnership with Makro, offering a R50 discount on rides to and from their stores,” it said. The group said that it had also seen success with its mobile point-of-sale system which allowed shoppers to complete their purchase anywhere in the store instead of standing in queues. “Our research also found that a significant amount of customers preferred stores to open for longer during this trading period,” it said. “As such we will once again have extended trading hours at selected stores. For instance, 93 out of 122 Game stores in SA, and 13 out of the 28 on the rest of the continent will be trading at midnight. “We will also have 29 Game stores trading from 06hoo. As with previous years we will have a standard delivery fee regardless of radius to our stores. A delivery fee of R90 will be charged across Game, DionWired and Makro stores.” Logistics Massmart said that it is also making a number of changes to its  logistics operations. This will include increasing the number of staff and security at all its stores, and implementing well-supervised ‘snake-queues’ in the staging areas outside the entrances of some of our busiest stores. “To improve fulfilment, we will also be servicing specific Black Friday online orders from our distribution centre rather than from individual stores,” Massmart said. “Lastly, we will also ensure that a team of high-transaction-volume IT specialists are available to quickly resolve any online technology problems that might arise during the Black Friday promotions.” Read: R6 million – the biggest single transaction on Black Friday 2018 