A growing number of South Africans are opting to stay home rather than go out for their entertainment, which is having a direct impact on local home designs. According to Dawn Bloch of Lew Geffen Sotheby’s International Realty, the growth of the trend is becoming very apparent by the types of features being included in house designs and the choice of upgrades being made in existing homes. “More people are having entertainment features installed and are converting rooms into communal spaces like home cinema’s and games rooms. “We are also seeing many new homes, even compact units in complexes, being built with features like pizza ovens, braai rooms and snugs,” she said. Bloch said this cocooning trend is largely due to two key factors – progressively convenient digital technologies which enable us to now do most things in the comfort of our own homes, and the increase in crime and unrest. “Technology in the form of easy-to-install home security systems and smart home integration enable us to create safe havens over which we have increasing control, especially with app-based systems that allow us to remotely access features like lights and entertainment systems lights. “And, with the advent of entertainment giants like Netflix and various streaming options, people have access to all the current offerings from the comfort of their homes.” Not just a local trend However, it’s not just in South Africa that people are seeking respite from an increasingly uncertain world and the barrage of negative news, said Bloch. “After The New York Times ran a story titled, Is Staying in the New Going Out? a blog posted on the Huffington Post declared that the acronym, FOMO (fear of missing out) has been replaced by JOMO, the joy of missing out and just staying home,” she said. “There have been a number of recent studies into the behaviour of this post-Millennial group comparing them to previous generations, with all revealing similar findings that indicate that cocooning is set to become a firmly established trend.” One such study by UK market research firm, Research Now, found that almost three-quarters (73%) of this age group prefer to exchange regular nights out for evenings of home entertainment, and rather saving money for special events and occasional big nights out. The study further found that, of the general adult population surveyed, 69% have a similar preference for home entertainment, with this preference declining with age to 45% for over 65’s. “The trend is gathering momentum, and we can clearly see how home design is evolving accordingly with more multi-use and communal spaces and increased flow between indoor and outdoor living areas,” said Bloch. Read: How to spot a ‘fixer-upper’ that’s worth the investment 