The Financial Times has published its world ranking of the best Masters in Management course for 2019, showing that applications for these programs are performing better than the trend in global business education market. For the ninth year in a row the University of St Gallen tops the ranking with its MA in strategy and international management. “Its formula for success has been consistent since 2017, in that its alumni have the largest weighted salaries three years after graduation,” said the FT. It said that applications to MiM programmes climbed almost 3% in 2018, while MBA demand remained flat over the same period, citing the Graduate Management Admission Council (GMAC). “Masters in management courses are also performing better than other specialist masters degrees, such as those focused purely on accountancy or finance,” the FT said. The cost and the return on investment are big factors in the growing popularity of MiMs, according to Andrew Crisp, co-founder of the education research business CarringtonCrisp. The business school brand is important, too. He highlighted London Business School’s MiM, which carries a tuition fee of £32,500 — about the same as an MBA offered by less widely known institutions. “That means you can get a great name on your CV to accelerate your career years before most MBA students would go to business school,” he said. An online survey by CarringtonCrisp of 1,041 young people aged 22 to 25 who had previously expressed an interest in business school found that big data was now more popular than accountancy or economics as a subject choice. But it also found that business ethics was cited as a preferred subject by close to a fifth of respondents, about as many as chose finance. Importantly for South Africa, Skema entered the top 20 for the first time, rising from 25th to 12th. Skema opened a new campus in Cape Town at the beginning of academic year 2019/2020. Much of its success is based on professional aims achieved by alumni, (89%), ranking sixth in this category, said the FT of Skema. The school also has the biggest rise in value for money over the past year, corresponding to a large increase in weighted average salary, up by $14,017 to $76,350. This is the second year running it has made gains of 10 places or more in the ranking, the FT said. Skema’s Global MSc in Management is offered in Brazil/China/France/US and South Africa. FT Masters in Management Ranking 2019 Read: These are the best MBAs in the world – including 2 from South Africa 