Commercial, retail and residential property developer Atterbury has begun construction of the first phase of a new multi-billion rand Castle Gate mixed-use precinct in Pretoria. Castle Gate will ultimately comprise 100,000sqm of office space, 40,000sqm of specialist medical facilities, and a hotel as well as 1,100 residential units, and a 23,000sqm convenience retail centre. The precinct will also include eight hectares of protected green areas that will incorporate walking and running trails. Upon completion, the project will cost R6 billion, with as many as 20,000 permanent jobs created as a result of its development. The Castle Gate project was first announced in 2016, with Atterbury partnering with the Erasmus family to develop the site that makes up the final remaining portion of Waterkloof farm. Approximately 15 minutes drive from Pretoria CBD, the site is between the R21 and the N1 and provides easy access to all key urban points around Pretoria and Johannesburg.   Castle Gate will be easily accessible from Solomon Mahlangu Drive, which is already in the process of being widened and upgraded as part of the development. The second phase of the Castle Gate project road upgrades includes building a new highway bridge across the N1, which will make it possible to introduce double lanes in both directions on Solomon Mahlangu Drive, between Castle Gate and Hoërskool Waterkloof.   A convenience centre will open in September 2020, and include retail, medical consulting rooms, offices and a gym. Atterbury said that the lifestyle centre will include to the latest store concepts for Woolworths, Checkers, Dis-Chem and Builders Warehouse, as well as 10 restaurants including Rocomamas, Doppio Zero, Spur, Ocean Basket, Nando’s and Burger King. It will also have a Planet Fitness gym complete with a swimming pool, as well and an outdoor walking and running track through the precinct’s nature area. The entire precinct is expected to be developed over the next decade and the second phase of Castle Gate is planned to begin in mid-2020. Read: A massive R1.2 billion redevelopment project is taking shape in Joburg’s CBD 