A new ranking by the Project Management Institute (PMI) has identified 50 of the most influential projects in the world undertaken in the last five decades – including a host of tech and finance innovations like Google Search, Bitcoin and M-Pesa. According to the PMI, which boasts 550,000 members, the Most Influential Projects list recognises projects that have transformed their sectors and the entire business landscape, chosen from among more than 1,000 high-impact items. The projects were identified by 400 leaders in the global project management community. While technological innovations feature prominently on the list – with the creation of the World Wide Web being the project to top the list for “connecting everyone and everything” – the selected projects are not necessarily all products or services. The PMI also highlights social projects, such as the Rwanda National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, as well as literary projects such as the Harry Potter series of books, which the group says “made reading cool” and spurred a generation of book lovers. Other projects include architectural and engineering projects like the Sydney Opera House – which shows the power of design to define a city – and the Burj Khalifa, the tallest building in the world. Ranked high up on the list is African innovation, M-Pesa, the payments platform developed by Safaricom and Vodafone. The system ranks as the ninth most influential project for completely revolutionising the banking and finance industry in Kenya and other markets where formal banking is scarce. Launched in 2007, M-Pesa allowed customers to use simple text messages to send money, make deposits and withdrawals, and purchase airtime minutes. In the first three years of service, users transferred more than US$600 billion, generating about US$100 million in revenue for Safaricom and Vodafone. By 2019, M-Pesa had 31.8 million active users in Kenya alone. Kenya has since become a leading tech hub in Africa, with annual GDP growth rates hovering above 5%, while M-Pesa has evolved into a full financial services solution where users can make small payments and exchange cash, and also pay bills, receive paycheques and social grants, and access loans and saving products. The Top 50 Most Influential Projects Read: Vodacom and Safaricom to purchase M-Pesa rights from Vodafone 